Douglas Murray: Jordan, we’ve been spending some time together recently on stage, talking, among other things, about God. But today I wonder if we can pivot to politics, and to one thing in particular, which has been on my mind, and which I know has been on your mind—which is the issue of where politics goes wrong. Where the right goes wrong in politics, and where the left goes wrong in politics. We should probably start with the right. The cliff edge is more vertiginous, it seems. What are your thoughts on that currently, of where the right of politics gets to go wrong?

Dr. Jordan Peterson: I think we have been able to box in the more unfortunate elements of the right. That’s probably a consequence, mostly, of moral deliberations undertaken after World War II. We seem to have come to a pretty general consensus, I would say, that claims of ethnic or racial superiority place you outside the realm of acceptable political discourse. That’s the cliff place, where dialog inevitably degenerates into conflict. I think the classic errors of the right are to fail to attend sufficiently to the tendency for hierarchies to degenerate into corruption, because of wilful blindness and rigidity—and, of course, that’s something that the left takes the right to task for, generally speaking. So there’s the hard line, which is ethnic identity as a mark of superiority, and then there’s a looser line, where there’s also error. I think the right errs in the same way that the left does, when they play identity politics.

JP: Generally, the way we’re conceptualizing the political landscape is right to left, as a distribution. But there’s another axis, which is, probably, collectivist versus individualist. And there’s collectivist left-wingers and there’s collectivist right-wingers. Insofar as the left-wingers and the right-winger are collectivist, then they’re wrong. You see that on the right, with their claims of ethnic and national superiority.

DM: Do you hear some of that coming back more?

JP: I don’t know. The thing is, there’s a lot of noise in the press, especially as you move towards the radical left, about the alt-right. But I have a hard time putting my finger on who, exactly, these alt-right people are. If you look at the radical left, it’s obvious that they have a stranglehold, I would say, on the universities, and especially the humanities and social sciences. One of the consequences of that is that the doctrine that those entities have been producing is spilling over into society, to a large degree. There’s a lot of noise about the alt-right, but I can’t figure out who the alt-right people are.

DM: Has anyone met them?

JP: Well, you know, what happens in the United States, I think, is that anything that smacks of support for Trump is immediately associated with the alt-right. But the situation in the United States is way more complicated than that. The Americans have been split 50 per cent Democrat and 50 per cent Republican—like, as close to 50 per cent as it can possibly be—for four decades. So I don’t see that the election of Trump indicates the rise of something approximating, even, right-wing populism in the United States. It’s more complicated in Europe, because the border and immigration issues are much hotter topics in Europe. It seems, to me, that there is a rise of ethno-nationalist parties on the farther reaches of the right.

DM: Something like that. Yeah.

JP: Yeah. But it’s so difficult to get accurate information now, perversely enough, that it’s very difficult to evaluate.

DM: One of the strange things about the whole alt-right thing is the extent to which it’s a way to avoid facing up to the reality that half the country voted for Donald Trump. It seems to be some kind of coping mechanism. When you were doing Bill Maher’s show, you mentioned, when you got on the panel bit, that perhaps you went down a level underneath the one that the panel wanted to talk about, which was just riffing on the awfulness of Donald Trump. You rightly pointed out that we can all play the game of who can be the rudest about Donald Trump. But you tried to go down to the level of, "what would you do, if you took the President away from the people who voted for him?" by indictment, or whatever the mechanism would be. They seemed utterly baffled by your question.

JP: Well, they were stunned at the fact that someone would pose that question. I sat there, and I thought about that for a long time, whether I would ask that question, because I knew I was jumping out of the game they were all playing. It’s like, "well, you have to live with these people. Do you really think that they’re all so stupid? Is that really your theory about why Trump was elected?" The whole Maher phenomenon is quite interesting, because he interviewed Ben Shapiro a while after that, and took everyone, including Shapiro, to task for the absolute stupidity of the catastrophe of Trump, without ever reflecting on the fact that clearly, in the United States, the liberal left lost the election. Trump didn’t win. Everyone thought Hillary was going to win. She had it in the bag. She only needed 70,000 additional votes. If she wouldn’t have played identity politics, she would have won.

Maher, when he went after Shapiro, took no responsibility whatsoever for the failures of the liberal left. It was all, "well, the stupidity of the people who voted for Trump." My sense—because I’ve talked to many, many people who voted for Trump—is that it isn’t like people on the center right and the right, the Republican end of the distribution, were overwhelmingly impressed with what Trump had to offer. But that was the risk they were willing to take. It was partly because they were so disenfranchised by the identity politics that the Democrats have descended into. They have nothing else to offer, the Democrats. It’s identity politics, or nothing.

DM: To an extent, the Trump-Brexit phenomenon is often uncomfortably put together. Lots of things make them different, but one of the things that makes them similar is the attempt by people to push away any attempt to explain what has happened, to come up with reason after reason, other than the possibility that half the people have a different view of politics. There seems to be some kind of coping mechanism going on, to keep pushing away the realization that your own side has got some fundamental misunderstanding.

JP: Well, I think it’s very easy for people, who don’t want to evaluate their own beliefs, to assume that everything the other side is saying is a consequence of their personal moral failings, and their ignorance, and their malevolence, basically. It’s not helpful. I particularly think it’s unhelpful in the United States, because it isn’t obvious to me that the underlying dynamic has really changed that much, given that it’s been 50-50 for 20 years, and it was 50-50 in the last election.

DM: The alt-right may be very, very hard to pin down or find. Anyone who would be a member of it would get a lot publicity—and have, in some ways. A couple of people who identified have never had more coverage than they have being identified in that way. But I sense there are things that are murmuring under the discussion on the right, it seems to me, that make me, at any rate, very, very uncomfortable, very worried. The one I started to notice a little while ago was, probably, in the last year or so. It was the increase of people—Q&A, sometimes; you know, meet and greets, and things after speeches—where I found there was at least one person who asked me about IQ. Now that had never happened until about a year or two ago. I was never asked about that. For a long time I said, "it’s not my thing. I don’t know about it. That’s why I haven’t discussed it." But it was always this sort of thing—"you should look into it." I could never put my finger on why I was uncomfortable about it, other than the fact that somebody I knew, who I was innately suspicious of, raised it first.

JP: Well, there is a danger on the right: the identity politics danger. The right will play identity politics different than the left. The leftist theory is, "well, we should all segregate ourselves into our identity groups, and then those who are the oppressor groups should repent, and feel terrible for their oppressive acts, and step aside." That’s one way of playing identity politics. Another way of playing identity politics is, "to hell with you. I will pick my identity group, based on race or ethnicity, whatever it is that I feel most comfortable with, since that’s the game, and then I’ll play to win."

My sense is that there will be plenty of people attracted to the identity politics games that you win. The people who have gone after me from the right wing have basically gone after me for exactly that reason. They say, "Peterson stresses individuality and individual responsibility, but fails entirely to appreciate the fact that we do manifest ourselves in groups"—which is exactly the same thing that the radical leftists argue—and, "it’s necessary for those of us who wish to preserve our culture, et cetera, to group together in our homogenous group, and act collectively to take our territory back." Something like that.

That’s very much a fascist perspective, fundamentally. But if the fundamental game is identity politics, it isn’t obvious why the logical choice is to lose. When I discuss this, I tell people that the whole idea—that you should view the world through the lens that makes your collective identity paramount—is a pathology game, no matter who’s playing it. It produces a reversion to divisive tribalism, and small, diverse tribes of people that mostly fight.

DM: But why do you think IQ and the IQ differential question has become such an edge issue for some people? Why that one?

JP: Well, the IQ literature, in general, is an ethical nightmare. I think that the right-wingers, who are using IQ as a lever, use it to buttress claims of ethnic and group superiority.

DM: Yeah.

JP: Of course, the possibility that that might occur is partly why the left has objected to, you could say, IQ research, since, well, probably for the last 30 years. It’s interesting, because when the IQ tests were first developed, they were developed in France, and then they were used in England for years by left-leaning parties. This was part of a conscious plan to produce upward social mobility; the idea that you could objectively assess intellectual prowess: allow the selection of, let’s call them "deserving poor," using the Victorian or the Edwardian terminology, who were of great intellectual promise amongst the working class, and pull them up into the educated middle class, or elite, and that that would be of benefit to them and everyone else.

The problem with IQ tests is that they do produce group differences, and that’s unbelievably complicated and horrible. It’s complicated because it isn’t obvious how you should group people, if you’re going to do group analysis of IQ. For example, there’s more genetic diversity among Africans than there is among all the other human populations. So exactly how you put people in the bin of black, caucasian, and asian, let’s say—which are generally regarded as the three major racial groups—is far from obvious. That’s a basic scientific conundrum that’s right at the bottom of the IQ problem. But if you use the typical groupings, you do get ethnic differences. That starts to become extremely problematic, because the question, then, is "why?" The answer to that is, "we don’t know."

You think, "well, the most commonly discussed ethnic difference is the propensity for people who are defined as black—the way that Americans define black—to perform more poorly on standardized tests." Then the accusation is that the tests are somehow biased, or that there’s socioeconomic factors at work, or, perhaps, at the bottom of the desirability hierarchy, that there are biological factors at work. No one has nailed any of that down. If you give that data credence, then it leaves you with the terrible question of, "what do you do about those differences? And how do you conceptualize them?" It can also be used as a justification of a kind of racial hierarchy. But then, if you reverse it, you see the reverse problem emerging with the issue of Ashkenazi Jews, because they’re overrepresented in most positions of competence, let’s say, and authority—radically overrepresented, especially at the top. Unless you’re willing to posit something like IQ differential that will account for it, you have to come up with a conspiratorial theory. This is the thing about IQ research: no matter how you interpret it, you’re basically screwed. It’s partly because the facts of the world don’t necessarily line up with our a priori moral desires.

DM: What we would really like would be for there to be no important differences in important function across all the groups that people are put in or identify with. But it doesn’t work out that way.

JP: One of the problems that I’ve been thinking about for a while—it’s such an edge issue. I sort of fear it coming in, somehow, to a much more mainstream position, unless there’s an attitude taken towards it. Obviously it seems that the left has been trying for a long time—and other people have—to keep it away. As you say, it’s a bell curve, at least, and the time before that—just keep it away as a discussion. It’s obviously bubbling away. So it seems, to me, that you have to find some attitude towards it.

The fundamental problem is that the best predictor of long-term life outcome is IQ. That’s a real problem. Now it’s not that great a predictor. That’s the first thing. If you’re optimistic about IQ, you’d say that it predicts about 25 per cent in* the variants of long-term life outcome. Other factors, like conscientiousness, which is the next best predictor—it’s a Big Five trait—accounts for about 9 per cent, 10 per cent. Something like that. So the two best predictors combined only account for 35 per cent of the difference in life outcome, leaving 65 per cent for other factors, which is quite a lot. So those factors could include things like prejudice and systemic bias, and so forth. But a lot of it’s also luck, and health, and all the things that determine whether you fall off the edge of the world.

The problem with IQ is that there’s no damn way it’s going away. People say, "well, IQ is not really a good measure of intelligence." It’s like, "sorry, people. This is where it gets truly ugly." There is no phenomena in social sciences, period, that is on firmer statistical and conceptual footing than IQ. There’s no phenomena that’s more robust. If you give people a set of tests that assess abstraction, and then you measure their average score on the set of tests of abstraction, and then you rank order them, you have an IQ measured. That’s all you have to do. The measure’s no different than your average performance across a set of tasks that require abstraction.

DM: The problem you sort of come back to each time is the manner in which people want to use the data—the ends to which they sort of find it useful. The first thing is that this is, it seems to me, becoming a way in which some people on the right are trying to come back with very ugly ideas, and very ugly prejudices. Secondly, it strikes me that the overemphasis on IQ by some people—I’m not saying by everyone. I’m not saying to neglect the literature. But the overemphasis, among other things, makes this error of thinking that intelligence, as it were, is the only important trait in human beings.

JP: I think the problem, there, is not exactly so much the definition of intelligence as the only important, defining characteristic of human beings, but to conflate intelligence with value or moral virtue.

DM: Yeah, and worth.

JP: Yes, worth. That’s the really pernicious element. There’s an underlying assumption that, if there are differences in people with regards to IQ, somehow, there are differences in their worth. There are differences in their economic worth, but that doesn’t mean that there are differences in their intrinsic worth. That’s something that has to be very, very carefully laid out.

DM: The novelist Iain McEwan once said that all readers have to, at some point, contend with the awkward fact that some of the nicest people they know have never read a book.

JP: Right, right. OK, let’s go into the IQ thing more terribly. IQ tests produce ethnic differences. You might say, "well, that constitutes a sign of bias." It’s like, "OK, if that was true, then IQ tests, when you’re using them to predict real-life performance within groups, they would under-predict the real-life performance of ethnic groups where IQ scores are lower. But they don’t." There’s no evidence of bias in terms of prediction. Now you could say, "well, that means the whole system is rigged. The IQ system is rigged, and the life outcome system is rigged." That would be, basically, the position of the egalitarian left. It’s like, "fair enough. That could be the case."

But there’s another ugly thing that lurks here, too. Let’s say that you decide that the way you’re going to deal with the fact that there’s ethnic differences in IQ, in the literature, is that you’re going to throw IQ out completely, and not bother with it. Some universities are starting to do this, because they’re throwing away tests like the SAT. People say that these standardized tests aren’t IQ tests, but that’s because they don’t know what the hell they’re talking about, because they’re absolutely and clearly IQ tests. Any test that tests a reasonable set of questions of abstraction that you get a total score from, or an average, is an IQ test.

So people can wave their hands about that all they want, but that just means they don’t know what the hell they’re talking about. So let’s say we decided to just scrap the idea of IQ. Well, here’s a problem. This is actually a problem Charles Murray and Herrnstein talked about in The Bell Curve. It was never really mentioned, though. It’s actually an argument that the left should be very sensitive to. Our hierarchies are increasingly IQ predicated. And so what’s happening is that the left is going to miss what’s going to dispossess most people—that they are, hypothetically, concerned about—over the next 30 or 40 years.

We’re producing a cognitive hierarchy, and, increasingly, the spoils of the hierarchy are going to people who are in the cognitive stratosphere, so to speak. It’s one thing to be really smart. It gives you an edge in a complex society, especially one that’s changing very rapidly, like ours. But if you’re really smart, and you know how to use a computer? You are so far ahead of people that it’s like you’re a member of a different species. If you don’t think that’s going to be the fundamental problem of the coming age, let’s say, then you’re not very awake.

DM: I suppose—just to wrap up this issue for the time being—that the thing I’ve been trying to work out in my own disturbance about this issue for a while… I suppose I recently managed to hone it down to this. It’s not that I think it should be ignored. I don’t think it can be denied. But I suppose one of the things that makes me so uncomfortable about the IQ thing is that, if the people who are most interested in it keep pushing it like this, I see some terrible concatenation of nightmares—because, of course, this isn’t happening in a vacuum. It’s also, in my view, happening at a point when—let me put it this way: the concept of the sanctity of the individual, whether you define that in a religious context, or in the kind of secular-religious context which some of us currently hold this idea, is sort of eroding in our society. The combination of that happening at the same time as an obsession in IQ, in the century ahead of us, just has a potential of a catastrophe of 20th century proportions. That’s a reason why I just fear that, if this isn’t dealt with in a reasonable way, it comes at us in the most unreasonable way imaginable, somewhere down the line.

JP: I think that’s a genuine concern. There’s going to be elements of it that are going to come at us in an unreasonable way. Look at what’s happened at Harvard. I mean, one of the things that’s happened there—and the Asians, of course, are the wildcard in this whole enterprise. The affirmative action policies in the U.S. were hypothetical set up, at least in part, to bring so-called minority—it’s not like Asians are a minority, but to bring minority people up.

DM: Access to the university.

JP: Sure. But it turns out that, if you use an unbiased selection process, then you over-select for Asians. You over-select for Asians and Jews. It’s like, "oh, my God!"

DM: Which is why they’re now discovering that Harvard’s had to come up with these techniques, to try to downgrade the Asians. Downgrading them on…

JP: Personality. The funny thing, too, is that it’s not that they’re downgrading them on personality, because they don’t use objective personality measures, which they could use. One of the things that’s really cool about the Big Five, especially measures of conscientiousness—measures of conscientiousness do not produce ethnic differences. One of the ways of putting together a selection battery that’s objective, let’s say—which would mean both blind to peripheral characteristics such as race, but also capable of predicting the desired outcomes—is to produce a battery of tests that blends cognitive assessment with genuine personality assessment.

Actually, it’s so interesting, because in the American context, you’re actually bound to do that by law. If you’re selecting employees, you’re bound to use the most valid and reliable current method of selection. That’s instantiated into law. The American psychological association has stated firmly that the proper way to do that is to use a balance of cognitive tests and personality tests. But virtually no one does that, for all sorts of extremely complicated and absurd reasons.

Now, then you might say, "well, we can’t use the cognitive tests, because they produce ethnic differences"—and you can moderate that by interleaving personality, which is one way of dealing with it—"We’re going to use something else." Well, it turns out that whatever else you use is more biased than the thing you’re fleeing from. That’s what’s manifesting itself at Harvard. "Well, we’ll use our subjective judgement." You know, the Harvard people have been hand waving about the fact that their bloody admission criteria are so sophisticated that you can’t capture them with mere quantitative analysis.

DM: This is their latest one, after trying to make sure nobody has access to what they were actually doing.

JP: "We’re so sophisticated that we couldn’t possibly quantify it." It’s like, "that’s not sophisticated: that’s prejudice."

DM: At every single stage, Harvard University, in this case, have done everything they can to cover over the actual fact that they are being biased for ethnic reasons in their selections. It’s an extraordinary sight.

JP: So what’s happening is that wherever subjectivity is allowed to enter into the equation, the Asians are downgraded as a consequence of "personality," which isn’t personality. It’s actually the subjective sense that the evaluators produce, when they read through the applications, and they know that the applicant is Asian.

DM: Judging the person based on racial characteristics, without having met them.

JP: There’s a variety of things that are appalling about that. One of them, of course, is the denial of the opportunity to attend a top-tier university like Harvard, for the students who were qualified to attend; the Asian students. But there’s another element to this that’s also, equally, pernicious, and, in some sense, more self-serving. If you set up your society properly—and this is the equality of opportunity doctrine—it’s in everyone’s best interest to exploit the talented maximally, right? In every domain of productive endeavour, a small proportion of people do most of the productive work. And so you want to take advantage of those people, those 1 in 1,000 people, or 1 in 10,000 people, who are mathematically gifted, for example, or gifted in whatever way they happen to be gifted. So if you don’t select your top-tier candidate—so let’s say the Asian students, in the case of Harvard—then society doesn’t get a chance to exploit them properly, and everyone ends up poorer. Apart from the fact that each individual doesn’t get their opportunity, there’s a social cost, too, that is not trivial.

Of course, the other issue is that the criteria are seen to be inequitable, because they actually are. That produces a terrible amount of cynicism about the institutions themselves. The horror of objective testing is that it’s biased. The more profound horror is that, no matter what you replace it with, you replace it with something that’s even more biased. So it’s like, "well, good luck thinking your way out of that conundrum."

DM: In your Munk debate in Canada, recently, you got into a fascinating subject, which I wanted to turn to, which is the question of, "if we are in agreement on where the right goes wrong"—racial differences being the most important thing, exacerbating such differences, and so on. The contiguous fall that we can all identify, that can happen to the extremes of the right. We identify that. You quite rightly said to your debate opponents, "where is it that the left goes wrong?" And rather like your conversation with the panel on Bill Maher about Trump voters, absolutely nobody was able to even understand what you were starting to get at, and nobody picked you up on it.

JP: Oh, yeah. That was a question that went nowhere.

DM: Just evaporated. We’ve had massive changes on the political left in this country, in the last two years. This question of where the left goes wrong seems—

JP: It’s a crucial question.

DM: —absolutely vital.

JP: It’s absolutely crucial. Yeah. It’s a question that intellectuals—in particular, I would say—are at terrible fault for not addressing over the last, virtually, 100 years. The intellectuals, roughly speaking, have been complicit in failure to define the excesses of the left.

DM: Why is that?

JP: Well, I think it’s partly because intellectuals tend to be left leaning. The best predictor for leaning left is a trait called openness, which is associated, to some degree, with cognitive ability, but more importantly with creativity. Left-leaning people don’t like boundaries between things, which is also why I think the left-leaning people can’t draw boundaries within their own domain. They don’t like borders, as we can certainly tell. They’d rather have the borders open. Why? Because the more open the borders are between things, the more opportunity there is for information flow.

Left-leaning open people like information flow. They think, "well, the net benefit of free information flow is positive." It’s like, "fair enough. But that doesn’t mean that there should be no barriers between things," which is the conservative perspective. It’s not only information that flows across open borders. All sorts of things flow across open borders. Things get muddy and confused, if there’s no conceptual differences between people. So there’s an argument between the right and the left about where the borders should be, and how porous they should be. That’s an argument that always has to occur.

The problem on the left is that clearly, clearly, absolutely, indisputably, if the right can go too far—and the evidence for that is the catastrophe of Auschwitz, the catastrophe of the Nazis. All that death and suffering is evidence of wrong, which is accepted by the left—then equal evidence exists that that can happen on the left. In fact, perhaps even more evidence. If you don’t think the evidence is credible, then there’s something wrong with you.

DM: There’s something that’s gone wrong from the 20th century, and is still going wrong on this. I think I’ve said to you before that there seems to be this presumption still, if this is a political center, that if you take one step to the political right—say, by wanting to have lower taxes—that makes you right wing. And beyond that, it’s just a vertiginous hurtle down to Nazism. It’s lower taxes, alt-right, Nazism.

JP: Yeah.

DM: And on the left of the spectrum, it’s possible to step left, beyond the left, run left, keep running, and the end of the running never includes the gulag.

JP: Never. Never. And not in the education systems either. No one knows about it. The first time my students at the University of Toronto hear about what happened in the Soviet Union is in my personality class. It’s like, "what the hell? First of all, really? In a personality class?" The reason I bring it up is because Solzhenitsyn drew an existential link between the failure of the individual psyche and the propensity for people to engage in the great lie, and the creation of these totalitarian states. So I view it as an extension of existential psychology and philosophy. That’s how I slot it into my classes. But the students otherwise don’t know.

It’s like, "oh, really? We had 100 million corpses pile up, and damn near put the entire planet to the torch, because of the tension between the West and the radical left. We’re just going to sweep that under the rug, like that never happened?" It’s very easy to be extremely annoyed about this, and even morally outraged. It’s hard to avoid the temptation, but there is, actually, a technical problem here. It’s one that the right is, perhaps, just as incapable of solving. This is the issue that you brought up. It’s like, "OK, exactly when do things go too far on the left?" The answer is, "we don’t know." It might be because there isn’t a single issue on the left that marks out the degeneration into pathological ideology, like claims of racial difference that support the notion of superiority do on the right.

Maybe it’s a pathological combination of five good ideas. Something like that. I believe, now, that there’s a nexus of ideas that mark out the left as too extreme: diversity, inclusivity, equity, white privilege—that’s not a phrase I’m very fond of—and exaggerated claims of systemic racism. It’s kind of like a mantra. It’s something like that, as well as the verbiage around the oppressive patriarchy. Jesus, you know? That’s a complicated box. There’s an interaction between all those terms. You can make a case for diversity. Should all elementary school teachers be women? Well, perhaps not. Should all nurses be women? Perhaps not. Should all plumbers be men? Well, perhaps not.

DM: You only have fairness, when you have more female engineers.

JP: Well, yes. And if we’re going to have a society where men and women are competing on a roughly equal basis, do we want a situation where all the engineers are men? Perhaps not. I mean, I don’t know the answer to these questions, because choice matters. So each of these individual leftist propositions has a domain of reasonableness about it, and then it goes too far. And then the aggregation of them also goes too far, but we can’t tell when.

DM: What makes it harder, it seems to me, is the issue of motive. The late Robert Conquest, one of the great historians of the nightmare that happened in Russian in the 20th century, was once asked, late in life, about this issue of the intrinsic evil of the two totalitarianisms of the 20th century. Even Conquest found it hard to put his finger on it. But he said, "in some way, the Nazis do seem worse."

JP: Yeah.

DM: I’ve often thought about this. I think the one thing you can’t avoid—when it comes down to it, there is some kind of intrinsic feeling that remains, that, whereas the Nazi regime gets it wrong for horrible and the worst possible reasons, somehow, every single time that the communists had control of a country and turned it into dust, it was, somehow, the product of good intentions.

JP: Well, there’s a universalism about the communist ethos that definitely isn’t there on the Nazi side. The Nazi claim is, "this is for us, and definitely not for you." The exclusionary principle is built right into it, right at the beginning, whereas on the communist side, at least in principle, if not in reality, the coming utopia was for everyone. There was the song of the brotherhood of man, and the idea that people could be included regardless of their origin. That seems like part of it.

There’s an evil built into the principle itself that the Nazis ran with, that is absent with the communists. But the truth of the matter is, to some degree, that it didn’t matter, because the tally of bodies was equivalent on both sides of the equation. So even if there is a lack of a certain toxic principle at the outset of the communist doctrine, it doesn’t make it one wit less catastrophic. It might even be worse, in some sense, because you can’t put your finger on it. My sense is that a line crossed on the left is equality of outcome. It’s part of the identity politics pathology. First of all, there’s something wrong with construing the world as if your group identity is paramount. That’s bad. That’s a nonstarter. It’s not so easy to exactly say why.

DM: Funnily enough, that is being pushed, currently, on the left. But it will, as you said before, benefit parts of the right in the end.

JP: Oh, definitely. There’s just no reason for the right not to capitalize on that.

DM: It’s an unbelievable goal that’s being created. A horrific goal opening down the road. We can all see it coming.

JP: Well, as soon as you say, "yes, your group identity is paramount," then you allow people, who say, "well, not only is it paramount; it’s superior." Well, that’s not that much of a transformation of the perspective, especially when you’re also saying, to certain groups, that you should be playing to lose. Anyone sensible is going to look at that, and say, "well, why shouldn’t I play to win? If group identity is paramount, why shouldn’t my group just win?"

DM: You can identify those people as being on the far right these days. The few people that have got this massive press attention for being called alt-right—you notice one thing in particular with them: the flirt with the dangers of fascism. You can see it when they’re caught on video. They like to drop in terms that resonate… They flirt with fascism, and they flirt with Nazism. This is, rightly, something that we pick up on, and our ears are attuned to it.

In London, where we’re sitting, last week, on a morning television chat show, a young woman who was invited on got into a row with the presenter. Because he supported Trump, and she was anti-Trump, he said, "well, since you loved Obama so much…" "I didn’t love Obama," she says. "I’m a communist. I didn’t love Obama. I’m literally a communist, you idiot."

This, as we speak, has become not just enormously popular, but giggle-some on the left, in this country. I’m not talking about the far left. I’m talking about the left, right up to and involved with Her Majesty’s opposition. "I’m literally a communist" has just been made into a t-shirt by a group on the left, and they’re selling it—this in an era when we’ve been endlessly told, "the only thing you do, if you see a fascist, is to punch them in the face." There seems to be—as I’ve always said—a supply and demand problem with fascists: there aren’t enough for the demand there seems to be, to find them.

But yet, here you have, live on television, "I’m literally a communist." It’s unimaginable. We all know it’s unimaginable that someone would say, "I’m literally a fascist" on TV, and everyone would find it wonderful, and everyone would make a "I’m literally a fascist" t-shirt. So this 20th century error, this educational error, seems, to me, to be having real-world consequences.

JP: It’s a catastrophe. It means that we learn half the lesson. We sort of learned half the lesson of the 20th century, right? And thank God we sort of learned half the lesson. But the other half has not been learned, and that’s not acceptable, not in the least. The data in the United States indicates that 1 out of 5 social science professors are self-proclaimed Marxists. It’s like, "you’re a Marxist? Really? Seriously, you’re a Marxist?" It’s like, "yeah, and not only am I a Marxist, it’s one of the things that makes me morally virtuous." "Well, what about the 20th century?" "Well, that wasn’t real communism."

I know what that means. It’s the most arrogant possible statement. What it means is, "you know those people who tried it before? They didn’t really have the same nuanced understanding of the sophistication of Karl Marx’s revelation that I have, or the moral character that I have. If I had been placed in charge of the Russian Revolution—the utopia? That was only a couple of decades away." That’s what it means.

DM: I once wrote about this with Eric Hobsbawm, the famous left-wing historian who, just shortly before his death, was asked in an interview by Michael Ignatieff, "if it took another 20 million dead to achieve full communism [in the state he wanted,] would it have been worth it?" He replied, "yes, it would have been worth it." Again, it’s unimaginable that this could happen in the opposite direction, but particularly unimaginable, still, is this idea, even after the 20th century, that these Marxist, "literally a communist" people still are standing on the piles of tens of millions of skulls, saying, "a bit more violence, and we might get to utopia."

JP: Always one more murder away from utopia. Well, and the way that the leftists defend themselves is by saying things, like, "well, what about all the deaths caused by capitalism? You’re not factoring them into the equation." Of course, the problem, there, is that most systems manifest themselves in various forms of bloody excess. And so how you tally up the bodies depends on where you draw the boundaries around your conceptual systems. If you include the entire history of the Western expansion into the New World, say, over the last 400 years, and you decide that’s a manifestation of Western capitalism, then, well, the tallies, I suppose, look different.

DM: At the very least, you can say that the number of people raised out of poverty by capitalism is significantly higher than the people raised out of poverty by communism.

JP: I think there’s something crucial about that. One of the things that we will have to contend with is something like that, which is that every system is, in some sense, a system of oppression and bloodshed. But some of them also produce a modicum of wealth and happiness. I would say that’s the proper defence of what has been established, as a consequence of the primacy of the individual in the conceptual schemes of the West: our bloody oppressive system, at least, produces some modicum of wealth and wellbeing, whereas the communist system produced, if you’re an optimistic communist, no more deaths—which I believe is wrong—but zero wealth, and a tremendous amount of collateral destruction.

It could easily be that we’re in a position where all we have to choose from is horrible systems, some of which do some things right, now and then. That would be our system. That would be the Western system. I think there’s plenty of evidence for that—accruing evidence. What’s happening right now across the world is that, as the idea of individual sovereignty, and associated property rights, and freedom of choice, and so forth, are increasingly instantiated in developing countries, those countries are moving away from conditions of abysmal poverty at a staggering rate.

The right-wing types have to admit that hierarchies do dispossess, and that they have their elements of brutality about them. Even if they’re functional hierarchies, even if they’re competence predicated, they dispossess people. This is the cognitive problem, in large part. It’s going to bedevil us over the next 20 years. I mean, at least there are fewer people starving now. There are more people being lifted out of absolute poverty. Child mortality rates in Africa, now, match those in Europe in 1950. That’s cause for celebration. We have halved the number of people in absolute poverty since the beginning of the millennium. So I think we have to grow up, and be realistic, and say, "well, yes: all human systems of governance and organization are pathological, to some degree. But some of them are minimally functional, as well."



I’m talking today with Nina Paley, who’s a brilliant animator. She’s making a variety of short films—which, I guess, are going to be joined together into a longer film—that feature Old Testament themes. She’s the creator of the animated musical feature Sita Sings the Blues. Her adventures in our broken copyright system led her to joining QuestionCopyright.org as artist in residence in 2008, where she produced a series of animated shorts about intellectual freedom called Minute Memes. More recently, she made This Land Is Mine, which is an absolutely brilliant, shocking, devastating, and also aesthetically impressive film about Israel, Palestine, Cainan, and the Levant that’s intended for her new feature film, Seder-Masochism. You can find a lot of Nina’s pieces of that film online. I would highly recommend watching them. We’ll cut a couple of them into this interview, so you can see what she’s up to.

I guess there’s two things that we could really talk about. I think the most important one, obviously, is your work. But, I guess, the second one is your concern for intellectual freedom, and your feeling with regards to copyright. But let’s start by talking about you, first. Tell my listeners and tell me who you are, and where you come from, and what you’re about.

Nina Paley: [laughter] You want to know about my identity?

JP: I guess that’s it. Yeah.

NP: You trust me to identify myself? I don’t trust myself, there.

JP: Well, that’s OK. You’re the best source we have today.

NP: Actually, I am not sure about that. I mean, I think most of us would agree that I’m an artist and currently an animator. I guess I’ve been doing animation since 1998. Before that, I was a newspaper cartoonist. I still do comics from time to time—not very often. I mean… I guess the thing is, I just came back from a bike ride, and I’ve just been thinking about identity, like, all the time, and how incredibly unreliable it is, and how I don’t respect it, including ways that I identify myself.

JP: Well, I guess that’s part of being an artist. People who are artistic are high in trait openness, and that gives them a very fluid identity.

NP: Huh.

JP: I mean, it’s an advantage, because people who are high in openness can think laterally, and they’re always coming up with new ideas. But it does tend to make your identity rather pluralistic and, sometimes, unstable. That can also be a problem.

NP: Well, I guess it’s not even that it’s fluid. It’s not like, "oh, I identify ‘this way’ one day and ‘this way’ another day." It’s just… I don’t really currently have much respect for the idea of identity at all. I could say all kinds of things about myself, but… you know… does that actually do me any good?

JP: Well, let me ask you a couple of basic questions: where do you live?

NP: Ah! Good. I live in Urbana Illinois. That’s verifiable.

JP: All right, and where were you born?

NP: I was born in Urbana Illinois.

JP: You were—so you’ve been there your whole life, essentially.

NP: No, I left when I was 20; I moved to Santa Cruz, California. I wanted to be a hippy. I failed. But then, you know, I was already out on my own, so I briefly moved to Austin, Texas. That didn’t work out. I moved to San Fransisco in 1991. I lived there for 11 years. In 2002, I follow my then-boyfriend—actually, we were legally married, so my then-husband—to India, which is one of the subjects of Sita Sings the Blues. Later in 2002, I moved to Brooklyn, New York, and lived in various places in New York for a total of about 10 years. I moved back to Urbana in 2012, right after my father died, and here I am.

JP: Why did you move back to Urbana, after all of that adventure?

NP: First, I was done with New York, even though I really loved New York. My first five years, there, was fantastic. I kind of achieved more than I even expected I would be able to and started to just get… The love affair with New York kind of wore off; and I wanted a little more peace and quiet; and I wanted cooler summers; and I didn’t want to smell garbage everywhere all the time. I had an opportunity to move back here, because my dad died; my mom was threatening to sell the house. I joined the Occupy movement: Occupy Mom’s House, trying to keep her from selling the house.

JP: Ah—so you actually had a specific demand, with your Occupy movement.

NP: [laughter] But it failed! She sold the house anyways. But I’m living in her new house.

JP: I see.

NP: Yeah. I was dating somebody that lived here, and that has ended. But I actually really like it. It’s much more relaxed; it’s inexpensive; I get lots of fresh air; I take lots of bike rides; and I don’t really care about… I’m just less stressed out. I care about identity less.

JP: Yes. Well, you had plenty of adventures, obviously. It must take a fair bit of, I would think, time of quiet and some isolation in order to work on your animation.

NP: Yeah. Well, I achieved that quiet and isolation in New York, actually, by just living in New York, in an apartment by myself. I would rather live in New York than visit New York, because when you live there, you can actually control your environment somewhat, and you can shut everything out. Whereas when you’re visiting, you usually have to be out all the time, being overstimulated.

JP: Right. Yes. Well, it’s definitely an overstimulating place. When did you start doing your animation?

NP: I started animating, as an adult, in 1998. Before that, I had done some animation when I was 13 years old, using a borrowed Super 8 camera. I just completely stopped, because I was in central Illinois, and there was no support for doing animation. There was no way I could have advanced beyond the neighbour’s Super 8 camera. But then, in 1998, I was burning out of my daily comic strip, and wanted to do something, and borrowed somebody else’s Super 8 camera. In 1998, it actually was easier to advance, especially in San Fransisco, where a lot of people were doing independent film. Yeah—I just picked up where I left off. I did Pleistocene clay stuff on Super 8 and shared that film with a band called Mick Fulps and the Brocodon Ensemble[spelling unclear] that did live music to animation. That was really fun. I was being gratified by audience feedback, so I made another film on 16 millimetre, and then my next film was drawing and scratching on 35 millimetre, and then my next film after that was drawing and scratching on IMAX film, which is 70 millimetre—really big frames. And then I got into Flash, Macromedia Flash, and I’ve been digital ever since.

JP: Are you using Macromedia Flash now? What’s your primary technology?

NP: A lot of those clips for Seder-Masochism were animated in Macromedia Flash. Adobe bought Flash and crippled it and ruined it, in the opinion of many Flash animators. So I’m still using Macromedia Flash from… 2007? Is that when my copy of Flash is from? I don’t know. Macromedia Flash 8: it only runs on older computers… Actually, I think it might be 2006 or 2005. I have this old Mac, here, running OS 10.6, because it won’t run on any more recent machines. It’s, like, impossible to integrate with a modern video editing system, so I have a new Mac, as well. The newer parts of Seder-Masochism, I’m using a program called Moho Pro 12, which is kept up and runs on modern computers.

JP: It’s funny how, sometimes, software peaks in terms of complexity and usability, and then goes downhill.

NP: You know, I think we’re seeing that not just with software, but with computers all together. Like, personal computers, I think, peaked around 2007, maybe 2010. They’ve been getting worse ever since. Any sort of upgrade to operating systems just means more surveillance and less user freedom, at this point.

JP: Yes, as well as a steep learning curve—which is somewhat annoying, if you happened to be an expert with the previous system.

NP: Yeah. Anyway, I don’t know if I can keep animating digitally, because the software that I’m using now, Moho—I just found out that the person that created it and was an integral part of its team this whole time just left the company. So Moho’s fate is unclear, and I’m like, "if I have to learn a whole other piece of software again…" I just don’t know if I can take this anymore. I’m so fluent with Flash. It took me years to become fluent at all with Moho.

JP: Yeah. Well that’s another thing: it takes a long time to become an expert user of a complex software program. And then, when it shifts, the ground shifts from underneath you. It’s rather disheartening, because all of that expertise, essentially, disappears. I guess it’s part of what we’re experiencing, as our technology advances fast enough so that our lifespans are too long, really, to keep up: we get outdated and superannuated on about a 5-year rotation, and it does get exhausting.

NP: Yeah. Well, maybe I’ll just die early, and won’t have to worry about it.

JP: Oh, yeah. That’ll solve the problem. But then you won’t finish your film, and that seems like a bad idea.

NP: Well, I’m going to finish this film. I finally see the light at the end of the tunnel, for Seder-Masochism.

JP: Good for you. So, let me ask you, some, about that. You made This Land Is Mine. When was that?

NP: That… was that in 2012? I think it was. That’s the first scene that I made. It’s going to be the last scene in the film, but it’s the first one I made.

JP: I see. What possessed you to make that?

NP: I knew I wanted to make a movie about Passover, because I was raised observing Passover—although, not much else. So I was doing research. I’d never seen the movie Exodus. You know that movie?

JP: Yup.

NP: I’d never seen that movie, so I watched it as part of my research. I learned that the theme music had lyrics written to it by Pat Boone, and that it was a really popular song in the ‘60s. Tons of artists did it. I’d never even heard it before. So I heard it, and I just thought it was ridiculous. Because: "this land is mine, God gave this land to me…" Everyone would say that, right? Every group feels that way about the land that they’re on. Every single one. So the absurdity of it was just apparent in the song, and there wasn’t even, really, a process of coming up with a concept for it. That was just what the song evoked for me—showing how every single tribe has that attitude towards their land. And so, saying that "this land is yours" and "God gave this land to me" gives you no authority at all, because, I mean, that’s just what it is, to be a tribe living on land.

JP: So what sort of reaction did you garner from This Land Is Mine?

NP: This Land Is Mine is the most popular thing I have ever made. It’s been viewed on various channels more than 10 million times. Many people like it. In terms of criticism, the criticism seems equally divided between people that say I’m a Zionist and people that say I’m an anti-Zionist. So it’s ether a really anti-Zionist film, or it’s a really Zionist film.

JP: >I see. So you can just add that criticism together, and sum to zero, and ignore it.

NP: Yeah. Well, I’m really flattered by it, right? Because if people that passionately, on polar opposite sides, are saying that, I feel like I’ve really done something right.

JP: Well, you’ve definitely done something right. I think that was the first film of yours that I saw, and then I’ve watched many of them—I think every one that I’ve been able to get my hands on, since then. It struck me in a variety of ways. The first thing that’s, let’s say, strange about your animation, is that it’s… First of all, you have great taste in music.

NP: Oh, I copy the best.

JP: You certainly do. How do you get permission?

NP: I don’t.

JP: Oh, you don’t!

NP: I don’t.

JP: Really. Really? How’s that working out for you?

NP: In the case of This Land Is Mine, it’s pretty clearcut fair use, because the film is parody. Like I said, it’s literally a parody of those lyrics, and that’s fair use.

JP: OK, OK.

NP: I actually think most of my uses are fair use. They’re transformative, but a lot of uses are not as clearcut as parody; so that’s actually a really interesting issue with the film, and "how is this film going to be released," and "how is this film going to shown," because there is no way I am going to ask for permission to use this music—particularly music that entered my head as a child, which I did not consent to, and I had no control over. Of course, nobody has any control over what goes into your head, right? You go out in the world and music is playing: it goes into your head. And yet, once it’s there, that part of your head that it occupies belongs to a corporation. I’m just done asking corporations for permission to use what’s in my head, which they put there.

JP: OK, so you basically solved the problem by saying, "to hell with it: I’m going to do this no matter what." And you’re going to iron out whatever difficulties are with that as you move along. That’s what it looks like.

NP: It’s an illegal film. In the case of Sita Sings the Blues… I made Sita Sings the Blues when I was—I was certainly questioning copyright, but I didn’t really see it as a completely bankrupt institution. When that film was done, I cleared all the rights, which was an incredibly difficult process and required hiring intermediaries, because the rights holders don’t talk to normal people. So if you do make a film, and you don’t have permission to use the music in it, you can’t simply ask for permission. They won’t talk to you. You have to pay lawyers and intermediates just for them to even listen to you, to tell you how much money they’re demanding, which is, inevitably, an absurd amount that you can’t afford. But I ended up spending a mere 70,000 dollars to make Sita Sings the Blues legal to show for free and legal to share for free. If I wanted some other model, it would have been more than that.

JP: Right.

NP: 70,000 dollars just to be able to give it away. Hah. But I’m not doing that with the new film. The new film, I’m making an illegal film. All of my music choices have to do not with their licenses but with the content and meaning and resonance of the songs. Most songs have a kind of cultural resonance that is related to the point in time they were circulating. For example, This Land Is Mine refers directly to this period of the ‘60s.

JP: Yup.

NP: It has a cultural resonance because of that, which a new song—like, if I commission a new song, sort of like that, it wouldn’t have the same meaning at all.

JP: No, definitely not. Songs like that, they pick up—it’s really interesting to watch what happens to a song across time, because it’s embedded in a context, and that context grows and develops and transforms. A song is really a mutable entity. It transforms tremendously, as it moves across time.

NP: Yeah, and that meaning comes from the audience. It doesn’t come from, even, the person who wrote it, let alone the copyright holder. The value of it comes from us.

JP: OK, so back to This Land Is Mine. When I watched that, it produced a lot of mixed feelings. The first was that it was very blackly humorous. You have this stirring propagandistic anthem-like music in the background that’s sort of overblown. The singer, he amplifies the emotional resonance of it, and then you have this nonstop carnage in the background, to this stirring music. But what’s really strange about it, as far as I was concerned, is it’s eerily beautiful.

NP: That’s something that seems to be a perverse and remarkable element of all of your films: they deal with extremely harsh realities, metaphysical and genuine. But you have this amazing capacity to generate these complex beautiful images, and to set them in an equally beautiful relationship to the music. I mean… I didn’t know and still don’t know what to make of the film, because you don’t often see what you might describe as stunningly beautiful satire. Stunningly beautiful artistic satire.

NP: [laughter] I don’t know. Mad Magazine was pretty stunningly beautiful, back in the day. It had, like, the best artists working for it.

JP: That’s true. That’s true. But there’s an element to what you’re doing, especially with the juxtaposition of the music that seems to elevate it, in my opinion, to something like the level of high art.

NP: What’s high? What’s low? Well, thank you. I thank you for the compliment. I can’t really respond with anything other than thanking you.

JP: Your aesthetic sense and the style that you developed… Do you have sources for that? Do you have influences that helped you develop that particular style? I know it’s a foolish question to ask artists where they get their ideas, but I’m wondering how it is you came up with the concepts you’re working with.

NP: Well, graphically, some of the style is determined by the software that I use. This Land Is Mine and all the songs and scenes in Seder-Masochism are Flash; and Flash, the way I use it, it’s what we call a "cutout" style, where I’ll draw shapes, and I’ll move them in relation to each other, but the shapes themselves don’t bend, or anything. Cutout is an animation technique where people would literally cut out shapes from paper and move them around under a camera. So that’s part of the style. With This Land Is Mine in particular, I was looking at ancient Assyrian art and ancient Egyptian art. Some of that is reflected—there’s, like, a little border of flowers, which comes from Assyrian art. Those are the main things: cutout style and Assyrian style.

JP: When you made This Land Is Mine, did you have the Seder-Masochism film in mind? or did that emerge afterwards?

NP: I knew I wanted to make this film about Passover, and that’s why I watched Exodus, and that’s how This Land Is Mine came to be. I just knew I wanted to do a film about Passover. I didn’t know what it was going to be, because I had never read the Old Testament before. Reading Exodus was, of course, an eye-opener. The film… I didn’t imagine what the film was going to be like when I started it, other than the topic I would work around. But the way the film is actually shaping up is a surprise to me.

JP: We should probably walk everyone who’s listening through the film itself. You’ve created a variety of what appear, at least to me, at the moment, to be animated shorts that detail out different episodes in the biblical narrative, essentially, surrounding Moses. There’s more to it than that, but certainly surrounding Moses.

NP: Yeah.

JP: Does the film, essentially, concentrate solely on Exodus, or are there other elements of Old Testament stories that you’re including?

NP: It’s really just Exodus, but Leviticus and Deuteronomy and Numbers all have bits of Exodus in them.

JP: Right, right. So it’s basically the story of Moses.

NP: It’s the story of Moses. Right. It’s the story of the Exodus, and then the establishment of the tabernacle and the priesthood and the religion. That’s sort of… I mean, it’s regarded as the birth of the Jewish people.

JP: Right, right. Now you said that, when you were growing up, you observed Passover but not much else.

NP: Yeah.

JP: It’s not unreasonable, I think, to observe that there appears to be something like a deep religious sensibility in your work. I mean, you seem to be treating the stories with a tremendous amount of respect. What do you think is welling up inside of you, to do that?

NP: [laughter] Well, I’m glad you recognized the respect. Any respect for this was… I approached these stories with an open mind and an open heart, and was expecting to find some wisdom in them. When I began this project, I thought, "I’m going to explore the religion of my father." My father came from a religious, Jewish family, but he wasn’t really religious when I was growing up—although, he wanted us to observe Passover, I guess, as part of our… He wanted us to have some Jewish identity. He wanted us to be in touch with our heritage, as Jews. But it was a bit muddled. We were forbidden from observing any Christian holidays. There was no Christmas in our house, whereas a lot of secular Jews do observe Christmas. There was, like, a really half-assed Hanukkah, and there were no other High Holy Days.

My dad was an atheist; so, after spending years reading many different versions of Exodus and commentary on it and things relating to it, and trying to understand it, and trying to find some way to connect to it, what happened was, I realized I had found the religion of my father, and that was atheism. I became, sort of, a born-again atheist, reading this stuff. My neutrality towards the religion changed to a kind of abhorrence towards it—which is not to take away from its importance as a cultural foundation. Like, I live in Western culture, and these texts are stories that everybody knows, to some extent, and they’re very important, and I respect them for that reason. They’re, like, a cultural touchstone for everyone. But I did not emerge from Exodus with… I had less connection to God than I had ever had in my life. I actually had, like, a spiritual crisis. It was really hard for me to have any kind of sense of a power greater than myself, after reading this and working with it.

JP: And that’s also been the case as a consequence of doing the animation?

NP: Yeah, because animation is like a meditation.

JP: Yes.

NP: When you [inaudible] an old story, it’s just a long, drawn-out meditation on it. And, sometimes, insights can pop up while you’re working on it. I mean, it’s just, like, in your face every day. There are insights that I have. A lot of them are comparative religion insights, because the previous film was Sita Sings the Blues. In this film, I included Aaron a lot. In Sita Sings the Blues, I left out Laxman, who is Rama’s brother. I decided not to do that here, even though, with a lot of these stories, when they’re turned into films, Aaron is turned into a minor character, and a lot of things that Aaron does—in movies, they show Moses doing them, like casting the staff down, and it turns into a snake. That was Aaron’s business.

Anyways, I showed Aaron in this, and I thought about how both stories have these brothers: they have the big, important, memorable brother, and the other brother, who actually carries out quite a bit of the work. That’s a similarity. Both stories also have a really gruesome scene after what we normally think of as the end. With Exodus, especially growing up with Passover, I always thought the story was, you know, "the Hebrews were slaves, and then they were free," right? The end is, they were free: they cross the Red Sea; they get away from the Egyptians. Hooray! Of course, what actually happens in the story—after that, there’s this Hebrew-on-Hebrew slaughter, because of the golden calf. A whole bunch of those Hebrews who were liberated, they die.

JP: Yeah. Well, liberation turns out to be a very complicated thing. It’s funny: when I watched the Americans go into Iraq with their initial optimism, and then the absolute disintegration of the Iraqi state and the failure to produce something, you know, stable as a consequence, I thought, "well, a little bit of Exodus would have gone a long ways." It was quite funny, in some sense—in a black way, because, of course, the people who invaded Iraq, who planned the invasion, were, at least nominally, committed Christians. I thought, "well, they took out the tyrant, just as the Hebrews escaped from the tyrant, let’s say." But Exodus lays it out pretty clearly: you escape from tyranny into the desert; and that’s no joke; and it’s 40 years, right?

It’s three generations before the desert disappears. In the desert, there’s nothing but intertribal warfare and the conflict around new emerging values, which is, of course, the conflict between the idolization of the golden calf and the necessity for the new rules that Moses imposes. It’s no picnic. I mean, a lot of the Old Testament is like that. I’ve been doing a series of lectures. I don’t know if you know about this, but I’ve done 12 lectures on the Old Testament that have actually become quite popular. I think the first one has about three quarters of a million views. I’ve been attempting to treat the stories with as much respect as I can, because, like you, I believe that they’re foundational stories.

I would say that my respect for them has actually grown, and my relationship with whatever you might regard as transcendent has been improved by that. But, be that as it may, even in the story of Abraham, he’s called forward by God to go out into the world. He’s an old man, by that time: he’s 75 years old. He should have left his father’s house and his kinsmen long before. But God calls him on an adventure, to go out into the land of the stranger, and to leave his home. It just goes terribly badly for Abraham. The first thing he encounters is a famine; then he moves into the tyranny of Egypt; then the Pharaoh takes his wife. One of the things you can say about the Old Testament is, "it’s not naively optimistic, in any sense of the word."

NP: Yeah, but the Passover story kind of is, as people observe it. When you read the Passover story, it’s just this nice part. Like I say, that other part, that later chapter—we never discuss that at Passover. The closest we’ll come is "40 years in the desert." I did know that the Jews wandered the desert for 40 years. I didn’t know they killed each other.

JP: Right.

NP: This is something that’s similar to the Ramayana, because the Ramayana is frequently told without the last chapter—without the Uttarakhand, which is the difficult part, right? which I think is the richest and most interesting part of the whole story. So I focused on it in Sita Sings the Blues. But yeah: I think that the most valuable parts of the stories are the most difficult, and they’re the parts that are left out, and most people don’t know about them. You have to actually read them.

JP: They are the most useful parts, because life is full of difficulty. And so, if you leap over the parts of the stories that are pessimistic and dark, then you miss part of what the stories are trying to teach you about how to prepare for catastrophe. In the Exodus Story, the fact that the Hebrews escape from tyranny is presented as a good thing, and even as something that God wills. But it’s by no means a straightforward passage from tyranny to the promised land. And Moses doesn’t make it to the promised land, right? He dies before he gets there.

NP: Yeah, and even the promised land is not nearly as much fun as we have been led to believe, right? The Jews are constantly falling short, right? They’re constantly angering God. They’re never getting their shit together. God’s ambivalence towards them persists.

JP: Yeah. Well, I also think that’s very realistic, because there are very few times in life where, even if you’re not suffering from the tyranny of other people or yourself, it’s very difficult to walk the proper straight and narrow path, and to keep everything organized, and to keep things going properly. There’s never any shortage of severe challenges.

NP: Yeah.

JP: Even if you’re chosen by God, let’s say, there’s no shortage of severe challenges. You also see that in all the other stories in the Old Testament. I mean, even when God is walking with someone, like, say, Abraham—or Noah, for that matter—it’s still pretty much nonstop carnage. I mean, Noah has his family together, and his "generations are perfect," right? And he walks with God, so he’s properly oriented in the world. But he still has to build the ark and get through the damn storm, and be humiliated by his children at the end. It’s a very rough business. So, in one of your shorts—and I don’t know the name of it. I guess it’s the one that specifically deals with the Passover, where the Egyptian firstborns are all killed.

NP: Yeah.

JP: What’s that one called?

NP: Death of the Firstborn Egyptians.

JP: There we go. An appropriate title.

NP: [laughter]

JP: I can’t help but harbour the suspicion that you had a fair bit of sympathy for the Egyptians.

NP: Yeah. Well, you know… They had some great art.

JP: Yes, and you do a wonderful job, by the way, of incorporating that into that film. That was spectacularly beautiful.

NP: Well, thank you. And they had religion, and… Doing visual research for this project, there was not a lot of really great ancient Hebrew art, possibly or probably because it’s against the religion to make art: you’re not supposed to make graven images. So in terms of coming up with the style that evoked this, I had to—you know, I was looking at art from the region, and I was like, "oh, it’s all Egyptian and Assyrian." Those are the people, there, that made the art—fantastic art. It breaks my heart that that’s supposed to be evil: that that art, which actually moves me when I look at it, is what we’re supposed to smash, right? That’s what we’re commanded to destroy, because it’s all full of idols. I’m not down with that, so I, you know, just naturally was going to sympathize with the Egyptians.

JP: There’s a real tension, there, that I think is worth thinking about. I understand, from a psychological perspective, why there was an injunction against making images. You see the same thing acted out right now with Isis, say, in the Middle East, where they’re destroying, for example, all the great Buddhist art and all the ancient monuments, which, of course, is an absolute and utter catastrophe.

NP: I mean, they’re following it better than we do.

JP: Right, right. Well, the conundrum seems, to me, to be that—and this is also played out in the story of Exodus with the golden calf. The idea of God is supposed to be something that, at least in principle, you can’t really grip; you can’t really encapsulate; you can’t dogmatically represent, because then it turns into an idol, and "idol" and "ideology" are very much the same thing. I think ideology is incredibly dangerous, because you take something concrete, like an axiom of some sort that’s very concrete, then you make that your highest value. It narrows you and restricts you, and also makes you incredibly dangerous.

NP: The idea that there’s a great danger in idolization, I think, is a very, very powerful notion. I think that’s what informed the restrictions against making graven images of God, because you end up confusing the image with the transcendent reality. And then you think that you understand it and have it in your hands, but it certainly does seem to have some pretty dramatically negative consequences, when the consequence of that is the absence of visual art in any profound sense, and also this injunction to destroy the idols of, well, the foreigner, or the person who’s heretical. I’m not exactly sure how to… what would you say… I’m not exactly sure what the mediating path is between those two extremes.

I think a real artist—and I definitely think that you belong in that category—is someone who isn’t using idols as representation, because you’re using your artistic talent to push beyond what you already know: it’s a form of exploration, rather than a form of canonization or categorization. It’s a journey into the unknown, and an extension of the way that people think. I think of that as a way of uniting with the transcendent, rather than trying to encapsulate it in some sort of formulaic box. But there is a great danger of that kind of formulization.

NP: There is that danger. That is, of course, the commonest interpretation of the injunction against idols. But I think the—I mean, it’s never borne out, right? It’s like, any injunction against that kind of idolatry has never resulted in the absence of idolatry, ever. We can clearly do it with abstract concepts. We clearly don’t need images to do this.

JP: You could argue that you could do it with words just as effectively.

NP: You can do it with anything. It doesn’t work. I wondered, when I was working on the film, whether it might have been a simple and misunderstood injunction against using Egyptian hieroglyphics, and it was a requirement to use Semitic written language, rather than Egyptian—because Egyptian hieroglyphs are full of things that fly in the air, and things that crawl on the ground, and things that swim in the sea, and men and women. All that stuff. I was working on these little animated hieroglyphs: "maybe it was just this!" Which would have made sense, right? They were antiEgyptian when these stories were written down, and they were promoting the Semitic language. That’s what you were supposed to learn.

JP: To put it, in some sense, in the same category as the dietary restrictions, right? The best evidence of the reason for those dietary restrictions isn’t hygiene, or anything like that. It’s, "don’t eat the food that the people who worship other gods eat," right?

NP: Yeah.

JP: There’s a variety of useful reasons for that. Certainly, one of them is that it… Well, it’s a price and an advantage. The people you eat with are your kinsmen and your tribesmen, pretty much by definition. So, if you share a menu and you share restrictions, it’s much easier for you to socialize with the people who have the same restrictions that you do. So it seems, to me, a reasonably intelligent way of keeping a culture cohesive. Well, it certainly worked for a very long period of time. So that would be an idea that’s in keeping with that: you certainly don’t use the idol representations of the people who you are not, because, then, you integrate with them, and your culture disappears.

NP: Right. And you don’t use their language, and you don’t write down things that they can read.

JP: Right.

NP: But so much of the books of Moses were about being different from neighbours—like, "don’t let your neighbours corrupt you. You are different from your neighbours." Interestingly, I was raised with that. My father, the atheist Jew, was adamant about not doing the Christmas things. When I went to school, they would have Christmas projects in the winter. He would say, "just tell your teacher you don’t have to do this project because you’re Jewish." He never said, "you don’t have to do the project because you’re atheist." Just, "because you’re Jewish."

JP: Right.

NP: We maintained some sort of difference in spite of not actually practicing Jewish religion, really.

JP: Yeah. Well, it’s one of the things that’s always been interesting to me about Judaism, particularly—and a mystery, I would say. I think there are very many ways of believing in God. One way of believing is conscious, and that would be the sort of belief that you can state as "I believe" or "I don’t believe." I think, in some sense, that’s the weakest form of belief, and it’s also the one most easily undermined. I think the more profound forms of belief are the ones you act out. They’re like a dance, in some sense, and they’re built into your behavioural coding. They’re not so easily criticized and undermined, because they don’t really operate at an intellectual level.

For example, watching your videos—they’re not reducible to an intellectual exercise. I can’t watch them and—first of all, I can’t say exactly what it is that you’re up to. And, even if I could lay out a reasonable, comprehensive description of what you were up to, which would be by no means complete, it wouldn’t be easy for me to mount an intellectual attack on that; because of your use of dance, in some sense, with the cutouts, and your use of imagery, and your use of music. It puts the entire discussion on a plane that can’t be easily reducible to an intellectual discussion. In Judaism, you see this—and this is the case, I think, with the atheist Jews, perhaps, most self-evidently: the rituals are kept, and the division is kept, and the encoded actions are kept.

The person might say, "well, I don’t believe in God." The proper objecting to that might be something like, "well, you might say that you don’t believe in God, but you sure act it out." People have asked me about my religious faith, which is a question that I find quite intrusive—not that people don’t have the right to ask it, because they certainly do. But I’m sufficiently ignorant about my own orientations, in some sense, to not know exactly how to answer that. But one answer that I find quite useful—and I think fairly truthful—is that I certainly act as if there is a God. The rest of it, I leave—I suppose, in some sense, in a cloud of as-of-yet incompletely explored ignorance.

I do believe that human beings have a relationship with the transcendent. I see that manifest itself in great art, for example, where people seem to be able to reach beyond themselves, to produce something that’s of spectacular, lasting, intense, emotional, and practical significance. That’s the realm of inspiration. I don’t think that we understand that very well at all. I don’t think that we understand consciousness very well, as well—at all, in fact; and I think it is a fundamental element of Being. In your work, too, I see—and it’s interesting to hear you talk about it. I see a profound religious… what would you call it… Well, I see a profound religious spirit at work. It’s so interesting, to me, that your experience of reading Exodus and doing these animations has actually, for you, been an increased sense of divorce from, let’s say, the realities of the text.

NP: Yeah, but, you know… The word I used to describe it is—I was "bereft" after spending all this time with them; because the more time I spent with the text, the more time I spent working on this… the less connected to anything I would call God, I felt. After I finished those scenes, it took me a really long time to get inspiration for finishing the film. I guess I finished the last scene of the Moses parts a year and a half ago. I just could not continue work on the film. I was thinking, like, "more Moses, more Old Testament," and it just made me feel sick every time I approached it.

JP: Is it possible—just out of curiosity—that that was a form of something like spiritual exhaustion? Because, I mean, your films are very, very serious, and they’re very complex. I kind of wonder, too, if you just haven’t, like, drained yourself of inspiration, as a consequence of working on this for so long. They’re very complex, deep themes. As you said, they do sit at the bottom of the culture, and it’s no joke to mess around with that kind of thing.

NP: That’s true, but I now see what I was missing. My muse has returned. I could say that I’m not religious, but I clearly practice like a religious person, because I have a muse, and I’m inspired by my muse, and I have faith in my muse, and I even have a prayer that I say to my muse. That’s a sort of religious lifestyle.

JP: I would say so.

NP: A spiritual one, anyway.

JP: Yes. OK, so you said that you even pray to your muse.

NP: Yes.

JP: Tell me about the muse.

NP: OK, well, would you like to hear my muse prayer? It may be amusing.

JP: Sure. Definitely.

NP: OK. "Our idea which art in the ether, which cannot be named. By vision come, by will be done, on earth as it is in abstraction. Give us this day our daily spark; and forgive us our criticisms, as we forgive those who critique against us; and lead us not into stagnation, but deliver us from ego. For thine is the vision, the power, and glory forever. Amen."

JP: Hm. That certainly seems, to me, to be—I would think of that as a mantra, to open up the gateway between you and this transcendent force that allows people religious inspiration. And you’re doing something like clearing out your ego. I think it is very interesting that it’s associated with the Lord’s Prayer, especially with regards to—you know, you make this interesting identity between criticism and temptation. One of the things, of course, that does interfere…

NP: Stagnation. "Lead us not into stagnation."

JP: Yes, but "deliver us from criticism," I think you said. Didn’t you?

NP: Yes. "lead us not into stagnation, but deliver us…" Wait, wait… "deliver us from ego…" Oh, boy… Oh. "forgive us our criticisms, as we forgive those who critique against us."

JP: Yes, the criticisms. That’s a very interesting element of it, too, because it’s often the case—one of the things that I teach my students, when they’re writing, is to get their critical spirit out of the way, to begin with. What people try to do is produce and edit at the same time.

NP: Yeah.

JP: And you actually can’t do that. What you have to do is open yourself up to the creative process, and all of its errors. When you first start, it’s going to be very much error ridden; but you have to allow yourself to manifest that error-ridden spark of creativity, to begin with, and keep the criticism at bay. The ego element is also, I think, extremely interesting; because to the degree that you’re trying to bend your artistic production to the proximal demands of your ego, then you actually pollute it. You propagandize it.

NP: Yeah.

JP: You reduce it, I would say, to something like an idol, because then it’s to serve some other master, rather than whatever it is that is supposed to be, in some sense, flowing through you.

NP: I totally agree. And that "serve the other master"—that’s a good way to put it. I have a real problem doing work for money. I love money, and what I like to do is do my work, and then encourage people to send me money [laughter]. But this whole thing where somebody says, "I’ll give you this money if you do the work"—I’ve done that. It’s just called "being a professional artist." It never works out for me. I did this segment of this commercial film. Ironically, it was Kahlil Gibran’s The Prophet—all animated. I did it for money. I got paid well. I thought I was never going to animate again, after that, because it burned me out so badly. It was a really unpleasant process, because the authority in this was not my muse: the authority was the people with the money.

JP: All right. So you were subjugating the greater to the lesser.

NP: Yeah, and if I do that even a little bit, the feeling is horrible. I liken it to how I imagine prostitution—like, all the warnings about prostitution, and what it does to your soul, even if you think it’s… I can relate to that, when I do the work for money. It’s really different.

JP: Yeah. OK, so back to your prayer. You modified the Lord’s Prayer.

NP: Yeah.

JP: Did you write that down? How in the world did you come up with this? And thank you for actually telling me. I’m quite amazed that you did, because, of course, it’s a peculiar thing, and I mean that in the best possible sense. But it seems, also, to be quite a private thing.

NP: I’ve been out about it since… I mean, the thing with Sita Sings the Blues is that it was, like, such a profoundly weird experience making that film, and it was so much like the channeling, and it was so much like getting out of my own way that I did want to share that. People would ask me these questions, like, "how did you make that?" And it’s like, "I don’t really know."

JP: Yeah. Well, you just said something that I think is quite profound. You said you got out of your own way.

NP: Yeah.

JP: One of the things that I’ve been struck by, with regards to both the prophetic tradition in the Old Testament and also the Passion story in the New Testament, is that there’s a tremendous emphasis in those stories on getting out of your own way. The idea is supposed to be—and this is part of the idea of the dying and resurrecting hero, of course—you’re supposed to let everything in you that gets in your way burn away and die, so that whatever can flow through you, that has true value and that’s oriented towards the highest good, let’s say—which I think is what you’re doing, when you’re establishing a relationship with your muse: there isn’t anything that’s part of the ego, part of the critical capacity that’s inappropriate, or part of, let’s say, worldly concerns that interfere with your ability to reach beyond yourself.

That’s a holy calling, I would say. Maybe it’s the primary holy calling. I certainly think it is. It seems, to me, to be the case. And I do think, in some sense, that is what artists act out, when they’re really being artists. They’re establishing a relationship with the source of inspiration, whatever that is. It’s not like we understand that. We don’t understand that. It’s something that’s very, very deep.

NP: I do feel, or I do believe—if I have beliefs—that regarding it as something that comes from elsewhere, something bigger than yourself, is, for me, helpful. I don’t like this idea that it’s all me. I’m connected to other people; I’m connected through culture and through language, which is culture, and through art, which is culture. Again, I’m just, like, a fish swimming in a sea of culture. What we call "creating" is really, you know, absorbing and processing all of this culture that I’m a part of, and just expressing a little bit out. I’m very dubious of the idea of originality, for example. I wrote an essay about that, on the cult of originality. I think that’s delusional.

JP: Yeah. Well, maybe the cult part of the originality idea is that it’s tied up with ego. I think that people can be spectacularly original, but I don’t know that you get to attribute that to their ego—to that part of them that you call "me". The mind is a very strange place, because there is obviously a part of it that we identity with as ourselves. That would be the "me"; that would be the ego. It’s the thing, I think, that’s capable of generating egotistical criticisms, and standing on principles for self-defence or dominance display, or something like that.

It operates at a relatively low level of moral virtue. But then there’s parts of us that are obviously far beyond ourselves, and that’s the part, for example, that generates dreams and visions—and, perhaps, even ideas. One of the things I really liked about reading Carl Jung, one of the things he made me really conscious of was the fact that—and Nietzsche, of course, talked about this in the same way, to some degree: it’s not so much that you have ideas: it’s that, one, you could say, "no, no. Don’t be so sure about that. The ideas have you."

NP: Yeah.

JP: So there’s that. The next thing is, "it isn’t so much that you think up the ideas: it’s that you encounter them, if you open yourself up to the possibility of encountering them." It’s like a process of discovery, rather than a process of origination, let’s say.

NP: Yeah.

JP: So you could say, even if you’re a biological materialist—which I, actually, don’t think you can be, because biological materialism doesn’t help us account for consciousness in the least. So far, we don’t have a good theory of consciousness at all.

NP: You’re saying, like, a biological theory of consciousness? Because I’m a biological materialist, and I think biology exists.

JP: Well, yes. Of course. I just don’t think it provides—it isn’t sophisticated enough to provide answers to some of the most fundamental questions of human existence, like the fact that we’re conscious.

NP: Right. I agree with that.

JP: The idea that you just expressed—that, when you’re engaging in the creative process with whatever it is you’re praying to, let’s say, you’re opening yourself up to something that’s beyond you. Now you could say that that comes from deep within the human psyche, which is a psychoanalytic way of thinking about it, and, I think, a reasonably appropriate way of thinking about it. But I don’t think it’s any more reasonable, in some sense, than generating a hypothesis that you’re opening yourself up to unknown forces in the cosmos. I think that’s just as intelligent an account of the phenomena as the former one. We are in contact with things that are beyond us, and I do think that’s a large part of what the artist actually demonstrates—and keeps it, and keeps it in front of people. I think beauty, in particular, is a powerful force for that.

I mean, when I watched your videos… really, they’re so beautiful that they virtually bring me to tears—especially in combination with the music, because I’m very sensitive to music. But you have this unbelievable capacity for grace and for color and for deep respect for the music, which, I think, is also quite remarkable. I often see movies that use good music, but that don’t have much respect for the music. They’ll cut it, you know, in the middle of a phrase, or something like that. I remember the movie Magnolia. It was a real exception to that. That movie uses music beautifully, and Woody Allen is very good at using music beautifully, and so is… who was the director of The Shining?

NP: Kubrick?

JP: Kubrick! I mean, he loves music, and his work, Clockwork Orange, has some of the same kind of perverse beauty that some of your animation has; because he used those great Beethoven pieces that were transformed into electronic music by Walter/Wendy Carlos, and set these brutal scenes of mayhem to beautiful music, which was also, I think, a very profound thing to do. Of course, Germany is the home of Nazism, and it’s also the home of Beethoven and Bach. You really can’t separate those things, in some sense.

OK, so let’s go to the copyright issue, to some degree. You’re not a fan of the idea of copyright, and that’s interesting to me, because it has been, arguably, a reasonably efficient way for people to, let’s say, protect themselves of theft of their intellectual property. Although, I would say that’s broken down quite badly, now, for people like, say, musicians, because their work is so distributable. Are you against copyright for all forms of intellectual property? Why don’t you tell us a little bit about your ideas.

NP: Well, you said that as if intellectual property exists. What is "intellectual property"?

JP: Well, I guess—to some degree, I’ll take the easy way out, and say that’s a legal issue. But I would say, at least to some degree, intellectual property is the consequence of abstract work. It’s certainly possible to work abstracting, constructing something like you’re constructing: your movies, or, perhaps, a book. It seems, to me, that it’s not unreasonable to propose that that deserves some of the same ownership protection that a physical entity would, like a… I’m not sure that there’s… There’s some level of similarity between you owning your house and not allowing other people in and you owning the more abstract work that you’ve done. I’m certainly not attempting to engage in an argument about the benefits of copyright. I presume that you have a very well-thought-through stance on this, and…

NP: It begins with acknowledging that culture is not property. It just isn’t. What we were just talking about a few minutes ago—where does this stuff come from? It comes from something bigger than ourselves. We were just talking about that: we do not, actually, originate this. We certainly work, but I didn’t originate any of the work that I’m putting out there. I mean, I gestated it. But we don’t own children, either, you know? You let your children go out into the world. If you want to own your child for 96 years and, you know, control everything…

JP: Then that serves you right, I would say. You get exactly what you deserve, if you do that.

NP: You get a dead child, basically—you get a crippled nonhuman being. The thing with cultural works is they—like I said, I’m a fish swimming in there. It’s like water. What happens when you enclose water? It becomes stagnant; it becomes nasty; it becomes toxic. I know that, for my own work, it has to go out in the world, and it has to continue circulating. For me, personally, copyright interferes with that, because you put a monopoly around something. If I, one person, or even if I licensed my copyright to others—when it’s centrally controlled, it does not move. I did a lot of experiments with Sita Sings the Blues, and, by far, the best way to get it into the world is to just let people carry it into the world.

JP: Right. Well, that’s certainly what I’ve experienced, as well. People are also taking my lectures and cutting them into pieces, which is not something that I expected, then putting up pieces of different length on the net. I’ve had companies contact me, and say, "for a fee, we’ll more or less hunt these people down and force your copyright." I thought, "well, no." I’m more thinking about the message in a bottle approach, to this. I’m willing to let the wind blow where it wants to blow, let’s say, if you could put it that way.

NP: And also, you’re making more money that way; because, as you just pointed out, people want to support you. They want to support you, because they actually see your work, right? If you were taking down all these instances of your work getting seen, because of copyright, fewer people would see your work. The audience is the most efficient distribution machine that exists.

JP: Yes, that’s definitely been the case for me. I’ve been fortunate, too, because I’ve been involved in some political controversy over the last year. Some people that I know, who have been involved in, let’s say, broadly similar political controversies, have been demonetized on YouTube. I’m outside of that, because everything I put up is free, and people are perfectly willing to support me. But it’s also very fortunate, and a new thing, that these new platforms for direct support of creative people, let’s say, have just emerged and developed. Thank God for that, because it’s very difficult for creative people to monetize their production.

NP: Yup. Just to say something more on this, with my films going out for free, the benefit to me is that far more people see them that way than would see them if I were trying to control them, and trying to get people to pay me to see the thing. So I made more money releasing Sita Sings the Blues for free than I ever had before in my career, where everything was copyrighted. A consequence of all my comic strips being copyrighted is that people just don’t see them. So, yeah. Just, like, releasing it is good. That’s the benefit to me. The benefit to society is that you overcome a form of societal brain damage, when you ignore copyright. I gave a talk called Copyright is Brain Damage. You can look that up.

All of us are neurons in a great mind, and all of us transmit and receive information. Copyright blocks that function in an attempt to control that function. I mean, of course, you can’t have a brain with totally uncontrolled, you know, firing of synapses. That’s madness. But I really think that each human being shares work that they love. So if you just let humans share work that they love, and they naturally will not share work that they don’t love, then you end up with a really healthy system. Really good works are going to succeed in that system, whereas controlling things with copyright is this artificial damage to that system.

JP: There’s also been a fair bit of crookedry in relationship to that, in recent years. I would say, perhaps, Disney is more responsible for that than any other organization. It was Disney that was instrumental in getting copyright extended from 50 to 75 years. I really did think that that was a form of crime, because some of those early Disney movies—and I would put Pinocchio in that category—are incredibly culturally significant. To forestall proper discussion of those cultural artefacts, I think, is truly damaging. It was a travesty, that that copyright extension as granted.

NP: Over and over again, and Disney’s not the only one. I mean, most of our cultural heritage is controlled by five big corporations. Almost everything now. Everything is owned by someone, and once it’s owned, it can be sold to someone else; and it all ends up in the hands of Viacom and Sony. Everything.

JP: So with regards to copyright, do you draw distinction… What about patents, and things like that? Do you think they’re technically different?

NP: I have a problem with patents. Although, my expertise is not in the area of patents. The one legal concept that is classified as intellectual property—which is a misnomer—that is not completely fundamentally bankrupt is trademark; because trademark, theoretically, has something to do with fraud. People desire some mechanism to control or punish fraud.

JP: Right, right.

NP: It’s not usually used that way. It’s usually abused as much as anything under the intellectual property label. But, at least, you could make some excuse for it to exist.

JP: Right, right. Yeah. Well, part of the claim for the protection for originality, we might say, is also the protection, you could argue, for genuineness. Like, I might want to know that—and maybe legal protection can help with this—that the thing that I’m watching or the thing that I’m consuming is actually produced by the person who said that they produced it. So if I go on your website, and I watch a Nina Paley animated short, I want to make sure that it isn’t someone copying you and using your identity as—it’s a form of parasitism, essentially.

NP: Yeah. But the thing is, I don’t have a lot of need for that, largely because I do free my work. So most people are aware of something that’s by me, is by me. Everyone’s welcome to edit and redistribute it. But if they said that the edit and redistribute was mine, "no. The work I did was mine, but you have to take responsibility for that edit and redistribution. I’m not responsible for your edit and redistribution." So, if they add some message to it that’s not mine, I don’t want that attributed to me. I suppose I could invoke trademark, or something, to do that. I don’t know. But, really, what I should do is say, "hey, I never said that."

JP: Yes. Well, that’s a lot simpler than engaging in legal battles, which, you know, are roughly the equivalent of a fairly serious disease.

NP: Yes. I took a legal vow of nonviolence.

JP: Well, it’s certainly a way of keeping your life simpler, unless you get attacked by something truly malevolent. Of course, that can happen from time to time. OK, let’s go back to Seder-Masochism. It’s going to come out in 2018, and I’m very much looking forward to that.

NP: Me too.

JP: Yes, I bet. A couple of things… It’s so interesting, because when I watch your shorts… I remember a couple of them that have Moses wandering through the desert with the pillar of light leading him on.

NP: Cloud.

JP: Cloud. That’s right, the cloud. Yes. And you’ve animated that in a very interesting way. It’s got a kind of grandeur, as well—which, again, spoke to me of something approximating the profound religious sensibility, which is partly why I was surprised by your comments about, let’s say, the intellectual effect of your endeavours on your relationship with belief.

NP: But you’re just talking to my ego. This interview, this is the ego-to-ego talk.

JP: Well, you know, I think, now and then, we manage to make it a muse-to-muse talk.

NP: Well… maybe a little bit. But if you interview me, you’re going to hear from my ego.

JP: Yes, yes. Well, that’s always the danger in talking to artists. I think, generally, when you speak to artists, you speak to the inferior part of them. Not because their ego is inferior compared to the ego of other people, but because the part of them that you would like to communicate with is actually the part that’s generating the art, and it’s already doing its communication.

NP: Exactly. That’s why I would rather—it’s like, in general, I speak better through my art than any other… And then, it’s not even "I" anymore. But whatever. My artistic expressions are more worthwhile than my talking head.

JP: Yes. Yes. Absolutely. Part of the reason I wanted to do the interview was to find out what your ego thinks of all this.

NP: [laughter]

JP: As well as to take the opportunity, hopefully, to bring your work, perhaps, to some people who don’t know about it yet. OK, so you’re making this magnificent production about Exodus and about the Old Testament. That’s a pretty strange thing to do, let’s say, in the modern world. Do you have any sense of what you’re hoping that will accomplish? I know that you want to launch it and see what happens, and that there’s curiosity associated with that. But do you have a hypothesis or a theory about what it is that this is doing? in the broader sense, how it is that you’re contributing to the cultural conversation?

NP: I’m sure that I do. I can’t access those thoughts right now, but I’ll learn a lot more once it goes out.

JP: All right. Well, I’ll focus it a bit more. In the Pinocchio movie—and this is a very ancient theme. In order for the puppet, the marionette whose strings are being pulled by forces beyond his control, to become real, there’s a variety of things he must do. He has to learn to tell the truth. He has to learn not to be a neurotic victim. He has to learn not to be an impulsive, pleasure-seeking victim of totalitarian processes. All of those things. But then, he has to go down to the bottom of chaos itself and rescue his father.

Now, I can’t help but think that’s part of what you’re doing. You said it yourself in the interview: you said that you were attempting to make some connection with the belief of your father, and to make some sense out of it. So you are, in fact, going into the void, let’s say, to rescue your father from the belly of the whale. It seems, to me, that we’re in a period of chaotic instability in our culture that actually has a fair bit of danger associated with it. I’ve felt a strong impulse to go back to these original stories, to find out what they are, and to reestablish them, let’s say, as foundational, whatever that might mean. It might be my imagination, but it seems, to me, that that’s akin, in some sense, to what you’re doing with Exodus.

NP: Well, yes. When I set out, I did set out to connect to my father, to rescue my father. But what I have learned in the past year is that, actually, I’m looking for my mother—and I think I found her.

JP: OK. Now, obviously, I have to ask you to elaborate on that.

NP: I don’t know if I can in words, right? I’m still in the process of doing this. But it’s like… it’s like… I have been seeking to connect with this father, this God the Father, and also my own father, which I didn’t have the best connection with. Nothing really terrible, or anything—just never really connected with him. I longed for that, right? a lot of my life, because the culture tells me that that’s really important. All the psychologists say it: "oh, it’s a really important thing." So my whole life, it’s been like, "oh, you know, maybe I wouldn’t be messed up about this or that thing. Maybe this is a daddy issue. I’ve got to get right with my dad, even though he’s dead." I’m just looking and looking there, and it’s like, "wait. I missed something. It’s my mother. It’s all of our mothers."

You talked about the original stories. You referred to the Old Testament text and the original stories. Well, they’re not, you know? Most of the history of human religion was not these stories. As far as I have read or learned, the early human conception of the divine was female—everywhere. We’ve broken our connection to that. Actually, the story of Exodus—to me, what it is, is the solidifying of that change. It was a long, gradual process of moving from Goddess, to Gods and Goddesses, to just God—just one God. But I’m reaching further back. And I realize, when I found that, and when I started working with that earlier religion, where we have no text for it… All we have is some artefacts—many artefacts, from all over the world—and beautiful symbols. Of course, there’s that book by Erich Neumann, The Great Mother, that talks about all the symbols.

JP: Yes. I was just going to brig up that book. Yes.

NP: I read that sucker cover to cover.

JP: Have you read The History and Origins of Consciousness, by Erich Neumann?

NP: I have not, but I did…

JP: I would highly recommend it.

NP: I’m with you. I liked him, although he writes like a lead weight. It was just good to immerse myself in that.

JP: Definitely.

NP: That is what I was longing for. And back to the Old Testament, these things are in the Old Testament. They’re all portrayed as the Other and the Enemies, and What We’re Trying To Stomp Out. But they’re in there. So, in that way, I relate to the Old Testament. Not the heroes of the Old Testament: Moses and Arron, and them. I take inspiration from the stiff-necked people. It’s like, "oh, they’re stiff-necked people! They’re disobedient." It’s like, "yes! That’s great." If there’s any history to this, which there probably isn’t, it’s like, "those are the ones I’m descended from—the bad ones!"

JP: See, I don’t know… It’s interesting, because in the Pinocchio story, and in the classic stories of journeying to the belly of the whale, or journeying to the underworld, it’s often but not always males who are doing it, and rescuing their father. It isn’t obvious to me, psychologically, what happens when a woman goes to the underworld to rescue her father. It isn’t clear what she’s going to discover there. It seems, to me, that you’re using your creative pseudopods to sort of feel out that territory and discover what might be there. That seems very important, too, because, obviously, there’s a problem in our culture. The problem is, "what is, exactly, the relationship between femininity and women and these, let’s call them patriarchal, religions?"

One of Jung’s criticisms of Christianity—and, of course, this is also evident in Erich Neumann’s work—is that there’s a Trinity, obviously, in Christianity, let’s say. It’s fairly comprehensible. There’s God the Father, and that’s tradition; and there’s the Holy Spirit, and you might think of that as the muse; and there’s God in the Son form, which is the human being who’s vulnerable and mortal, and who’s destined to live on earth. Those are nice elements of the divine. But there’s a missing form, as far as Jung was concerned. He thought of that as, sometimes, constituted by the figure of Satan—that was where evil fit—but also sometimes constituted by femininity itself, and that those two things were often conflated, as well, because they were the other.

That is a complicated technical problem, because it’s not precisely obvious what the divine model is for women, especially now that they have control over their reproductive function. They’re sort of half women in the traditional, classic, biological sense. Half female, but also, in some sense, half male, because they have that freedom now.

NP: Women don’t have control over the reproductive function, sadly. I mean, if we lived in that world, we could talk that way. But, no. Practically speaking, women really don’t.

JP: You mean because it’s unreliable?

NP: Well, for one thing, are you talking about, like, hormonal pills? Birth control pills?

JP: I’m talking about birth control pills.

NP: Well, I can’t take them. They have horrible side effects for me and quite a few women.

JP: Yes, definitely.

NP: So it’s not like, "oh, we invented this pill…" I mean, that’s actually a great example of, you know, our patriarchal society, right? A pill like that could be developed for men: men wouldn’t tolerate the side effects. In fact, they were developing a pill like that for men, but they cut the experiment short because men weren’t tolerating the side effects, which were no worse than the side effects for women. But women are going to tolerate that shit…

JP: Yes. Well, the price is much higher.

NP: Yeah, we’re physically more vulnerable. Anyway, it, like, never ends. This is why I believe in biological reality, by the way. This is why I’m a biological materialist: because regardless of my identity, regardless of my ideas, every month I’m doubled over in pain and having, like, very real consequences of my biology.

JP: Right. You just did a short about the Great Mother. I wondered if you had read Neumann's book, when I saw that, because that is an absolutely great book. And, as I said, I would recommend The History and Origins of Consciousness. I think it would help answer some of the questions that you were talking about today.

NP: I believe you.

JP: It was the book that Jung said he wished he would have written, which is a hell of a thing for someone like him to say, because he was a remarkable genius. So the new film—what’s it called? The one that features the Great Mother.

NP: God-Mother.

JP: Yes, exactly. That seems importantly related to this issue that you brought up about rediscovering the connection with your mother, by going to…

NP: Yes. I don’t mean my actual mother. I mean The Mother. The Great Mother. I live with my actual mother. She’s great, and everything, but we’re on a metaphorical plane.

JP: Yes, yes.

NP: That, actually, is the first scene of Seder-Masochism. So I did the last scene first, and then it took years for me to figure out what the first scene is. There’s going to be no introduction and no explanation. That’s going to set the stage for the Exodus stories that follow.

JP: Thank you for talking with me.

NP: Thank you for talking with me.

JP: I wish you the best with your film, and I hope that exactly what should happen with it will happen.

NP: Thank you.

JP: And I’m going to steal liberally from your films to illustrate this interview, if you don’t mind. And I’ll try to be very respectful and careful with the editing.

NP: Excellent. But it would be copying, not stealing.

JP: Oh, yes. Copying. Well, thank you very much. It was a pleasure talking with you.



Well, I think you don’t want to underestimate the role that technological transformation has played in this. I’ve been thinking about YouTube and podcasts quite intensely for about two years. I started putting my university lectures on YouTube in 2013. I did that for a variety of reasons—mostly curiosity and the drive to learn. I’ve found that, if I want to learn a technology, the best way to do it is to use it. I’m always learning new technologies—not that that makes me particularly unique—and I had some success with my lectures on public television in Canada. I did some lectures with this series called "Big Ideas" on Canadian public television.

There’s about 200 of those lectures, and I did five of them. Two hundred done by 200 different people, but I did five of them, and they were regularly in the top 10 of the most viewed lectures. So I knew there was some broader market for, let’s say, ideas. I thought, "well, I might as well put my lectures up on YouTube, and see what happens." And then, by April of 2016, I had a million views. I thought, "huh. The only reason people are watching these is because they want to watch them, because they’re actually really hard." A million of something is a lot. If you sell a million copies of your book—well, first of all, that never happens, right? It’s very, very rare. You never have your scientific papers cited a million times. You rarely have a million dollars. It’s a very large number.

BW: Well, this room excepted.

JP: Well, fair enough. It’s, of course, not as uncommon as it once was, but it’s still a significant number, and I didn’t really have any way of calibrating that. I thought, "well, what am I supposed to do, now that I hit a million views? How am I supposed to conceptualize that? What is this YouTube thing anyways, that was once a repository for cute cat videos? What does it mean to have a million views on it?" So I really started to think about it, because there were a lot of people commentating, as well, and they were into the lectures and following them avidly. I thought, "OK, so what is this YouTube, exactly?" I thought, "well, for the first time in human history, the spoken word has the same reach as the written word. And not only that: no lagged publication and no barrier to entry." That’s a major technological revolution. That’s a Gutenberg revolution. That’s a big deal. This is a game changer. It was soon after that that I discovered the podcast world, which is about 10 times as big as the YouTube world. The podcast world is also a Gutenberg revolution, except it’s even more extensive.

The problem with books and videos is that you can’t do anything else while you’re doing them, right? When you’re reading, you’re reading. When you’re watching a video, you can be distracted, but you have to pay attention to the video. But, if you’re listening to a podcast, you can be driving a forklift or a long haul trunk, or you can be exercising or doing the dishes. And so what that means is that podcasts free up, say, two hours a day, for people to engage in education activities that they wouldn’t otherwise be able to engage in, and that’s about one-eight of people’s lives.

So podcasts hand people one-eighth of their life back, to engage in high-level education. I thought, "well, people actually want to do this. There’s a massive market for high-level intellectual engagement, that’s much deeper and more desperate, let’s say, than anyone suspected." We really saw that in Vancouver. I mean, the discussion I had with Sam Harris, the two discussions—we talked about the relationship between facts and values, and science and religion more peripherally. But the dialog was conducted approximately at the level, I would say, of a pretty rigorous PhD defense.

We were only suppose to talk for an hour and go to Q&A, but the crowd didn’t want us to stop, so we talked, the first night, for two and a half hours, and the second night for two and a half hours. The crowd was 100 per cent on board the entire time. It wasn’t because Sam was winning or I was winning. Neither of us, in fact, were trying to win: we were trying to learn something, and we were actually trying to learn something. We weren’t just pretending to do that. The place erupted at the end, and I think one of the things I’ve realized in the last couple of days, as I’ve been thinking this through, is the narrow bandwidth of TV has made us think we’re stupider than we are. People have a real hunger for deep intellectual dialog, and that can be met with these new technologies. That has revolutionary significance, and that’s starting to unfold.

BW: I wonder about… You love to quote this line, this Nietzsche line, that anyone who has a "why" to live for can endure almost any "how".

JP: Yeah.

BW: What’s your "why"? What’s driving you? You are the most busy man—I mean, to get you here… Wherever you were last night, and in Portland tomorrow… I don't know how you’re alive, frankly, right now. What is driving you? What is this relentless drive, and what are you pushing toward?

JP: I’m trying to… Well, I spent 15 years writing the first book I wrote, which is called Maps of Meaning. It’s akin to 12 Rules for Life, although it’s a much more difficult book. The audio version of that book is out now, by the way. It’s been out since June 12th. If you liked 12 Rules or you were interested in it, you could try that. I think the audio version is much more accessible, because it's a difficult book. Getting the cadences of the sentences right is an aid to comprehension. I spent 15 years writing that book, about three hours a day writing, and a lot more time reading.

I was interested in solving a problem. I was interested in the great atrocities of the 20th century: the ones that were committed on the right and the ones that were committed on the left. But I was interested in it psychologically. What that means was, had I been there, what could have I done to not participate? So that’s what I’ve been trying to figure out; because, for me, what happened in Nazi Germany, and what happened in the Gulag Archipelago, and in Maoist China—many places—was a sufficient definition of "hell"—convincing, as well. I wanted to understand what the opposite of that was, and not sociologically or politically or economically, because I think that, in the final analysis, those levels of explanation are insufficient. But psychologically, "how is it that you must conduct yourself in the world, so that if the opportunity to participate in such things arises, you won’t?"

When the holocaust museums went up, there was a motto that went up along with them, which was, "never forget". I thought, "yeah, fair enough. But you can’t remember what you don’t understand." So I wanted to understand it. When people read history, they either read it as detached observer, or they tend to read it as, well, maybe, the heroic protagonist. People like to imagine that they would be Schindler in Schindler’s List, but that’s wrong. The probability that you’ll be the perpetrator is much higher, especially merely the perpetrator that’s ensconced in silence, when silence is not the appropriate thing.

So I wanted to, having figured out what constituted hell and the pathway to that—which would be, I suppose, the cowardice and resentment that produces either complicitness in those events or failure to oppose them when they emerge. I wanted to understand what the opposite of that was, because I think that’s what needs to be learned from what happened in the 20th century. I wrote Maps of Meaning to understand that, and to lay out what the opposite was. That turned out to be extremely helpful, to me, and then to the people I started to teach about that, because it’s useful to know what the opposite of hell is.

I’ve been teaching those things to people since 1993, so that’s 25 years. The response from the students has always been the same sort of response I’m getting now, absent some of the negative characterizations, let’s say, which have emerged for particular reasons. But these students have always said one of two things, and this is the vast majority of them. This isn’t cherry-picked responses: it’s been the same everywhere. And this is the same response I get from my audiences now, too. They say, "you’ve given me words to explain and understand things that I always knew to be true," or, "I was in a very dark place for one of the seven reasons that people might be in a dark place"—alcohol or drugs or failure of relationships or lack of vision or nihilism or hopelessness or depression or anxiety, or all of the pitfalls that people can encounter—"and I’ve been developing a vision for my life, and trying to adopt responsibility, and trying to be careful with what I say, and things are way better." That’s what drives me.

It’s so interesting, watching what’s happening, because, you know, you said, "I’m the most loathed and the most loved man." It's like, I’m loathed by a very small percentage of very noisy people, and they are people who either don’t or haven’t or won’t take a look at what I’m doing, partly because it doesn’t fit within their conceptual scheme. Whenever I’m interviewed by journalists that have the scent of blood in their nose, let’s say, they’re very willing and able to characterize the situation I find myself in as political, but that’s because they can’t see the world in any other manner than political.

The political is a tiny fraction of the world, and what I’m doing isn’t political: it’s psychological, or philosophical, or theological. The political element is peripheral. If people come to the live lectures, let’s say, that’s absolutely self-evident. That’s not what they’re about; that’s not why people are there; that isn’t what they talk to me about afterwards. It’s fundamentally irrelevant. The only reason this ever became political is because, in Canada, our provincial and federal governments had the unspeakable arrogance to propose compelled speech legislation in a British common law system, where that had never been done, ever, even once, and despite the fact that your Supreme Court in 1942 made such things unconstitutional.

BW: Can you explain to people, here, what actually happened? Which is that you opposed this law, which was going to compel you, you say, to use preferred pronouns of people that are transgender. Is that accurate?

JP: It’s accurate but partial. There were provincial laws that were already in place to compel this sort of thing, but a federal law had been generated. I went and read the policy guidelines within which the federal law was to be interpreted. Those were produced by the Ontario Human Rights Commission, which is a radical leftist inquisition, fundamentally. They had documented out a very large number of policies that would make anyone sensible’s hair stand on end—if they read them, which they didn’t. But I did, and not only did I read them, I understood them; and, having read them and understood them, I made videos.

One night, I got up at about three in the morning, because it was really bothering me, for a variety of complicated reasons, including the fact that a number of my clinical clients had been bullied into a state of ill mental health, by radical social justice warriors, at their various work places. This was long before I was embroiled in any of this controversy, by the way, so it wasn’t a sampling bias. At the same time, my university had the unmitigated gall to mandate unconscious bias retraining for their human resources staff, despite the fact that unconscious bias measurements are not reliable or valid, even by the testimony of their formulators, and despite the evidence that there is no data whatsoever lending unconscious bias retraining even the vaguest shred of credible outcome. So these videos—because I was annoyed about this, and I thought, "what will happen if I make a video?"

BW: This is one of the things that I feel—or maybe you can answer it for us. I feel, because of this incident, you are often characterized, at least in the mainstream press, as being transphobic. If you had a student come to you, and they said to you, "I was born female. I now identify as male. I want you to call me by male pronouns." Would you say yes to that?

JP: Well, it would depend on the student, and the context, and why I thought they were asking me, and what I believed their demand actually characterized, and all of that. Because that can be done in a way that’s genuine and acceptable, and in a way that’s manipulative and unacceptable. If it was genuine and acceptable, then I’d have no problem with it; and if it was manipulative and unacceptable, then not a chance. You might think, "well, who am I to judge?"

BW: How do you tell?

JP: Well, first of all, I am a clinical psychologist, and I’ve talked to people for about 25,000 hours, and I’m responsible for judging how I’m going to use my words. I judge it the same way I judge all the interactions I have with people, which is to the best of my ability and characterized by all the errors that I’m prone to. So, you know, I’m not saying that my judgment would be unerring, but I have to live with the consequences. I’m willing to accept the responsibility. But, also, to be clear about this, that never happened: I never refused to call anyone by anything that they had asked me to call them by. Although that’s been reported multiple times, it’s a complete falsehood, and it had nothing to do with the transgender issue, as far as I was concerned. Besides that, if it had only to do with the transgender issue in Canada, the probability that this would have had the impact that it had is zero. It wasn’t about that at all. It was about something far deeper and far more insidious, and everyone knew it, which was why it didn't go away. What should have happened is there should have been some controversy around it—maybe even a protest—and everyone’s attention should have gone away, like, a week later. That didn’t happen even a little bit. As I knew, there’s far more going on, here, than this little bill would have revealed.

BW: One of your rules in 12 Rules is—I hope I’m getting this right—"choose your words carefully". It would be ironic, if I got that one wrong.

JP: "Be precise in your speech".

BW: OK, "be precise in your speech".

JP: You got it right.

BW: Sort of.

JP: Yeah, you got the gist of it. That’s the crucial thing.

BW: One of the things that’s happened to you in the past two years is that every utterance of yours—and Kitty alluded to this in her introduction—is analyzed, maybe manipulated. How do you live with that reality? How do you even have the confidence to, sort of, continue, from my perspective, rush into the breach on all sorts of—what have become third rail issues, knowing that so much of what you say is going to be mischaracterized. And then I have a followup to that.

JP: Well, I mean, about 25 years ago, 30 years ago, maybe. 1985… I guess that’s… How far along ago is that… It’s a long time.

BW: Some years.

JP: Yeah. I decided that I was going to be very careful with what I said. When I was thinking through some of these ideas that I already described, trying to understand what tilted people towards vengefulness and cruelty, I was contemplating that personally: "what would tilt me towards that? or what did tilt me towards that?" At the same time, I developed an acute awareness of my speech. I asked a question, and when you ask yourself a question, and you really ask a question, you start thinking of the answer, whether you want to think it up or not. And the answer that you might generate might bear very little resemblance that you would like to generate. I had asked myself a question, which was, "what’s the pathway out of this hell?" let’s say, "and how might I be tangled up in that?"

One of the things I started to realize was that I wasn’t very careful with what I said. That seemed, in some way, to be related to that. It’s not surprising, because it’s not really obvious that the Nazis, for example, were all that careful about what they said, in terms of its relationship to the truth. Quite the contrary, and the same with the ideologs in the Soviet Union—so the idea that there was some relationship between carelessness in speech, lies and deception, and that sort of thing, or self-aggrandizement, or any of the things you can indulge in, if you’re careless with your speech, and the weakening of our character to the point where you might get tangled up in great and terrible sociological movements. That seemed, to me, to be reasonable—and many people have commented on that, like Solzhenitsyn, for example. So I started to experience discomfort with what I was saying. What seemed to happen was that I started to realize, and could feel it—I was reading Carl Rogers at the same time, and he actually suggested that psychotherapists pay attention to exactly this sort of thing. I started to understand that many of the things I was saying weren’t true. I didn't really believe them; they weren't really my thoughts; they made me feel weak, when I said them.

BW: Can you give an example?

JP: That’s a good question. Can I give you an example… Oh, maybe I would engage in an argument with someone at a bar on an intellectual issue, for the purpose of displaying my intellectual superiority—or, at least, hypothetically displaying it, you know? Sometimes people like to argue, and they like to argue because, hypothetically, they would like to win.

BW: So you don’t mean, though, that you were mouthing platitudes.

JP: Oh, sure. I was doing that, definitely. Oh, yes. All the time. And sometimes they weren’t even platitudes, you know? They might have been things I picked up in books, that weren’t cliches. But they weren’t mine. I didn’t have any right to them. Just because you read something, doesn’t mean you have a right to it. You have to understand it, and understanding something that’s deep means a deep transformation. It means you have to live it. So just because you know a philosophical concept and you can say it, doesn’t give you the right to utter it, as if it’s yours. You have to earn that. I was a smart kid, and my head was full of ideas that I hadn’t earned. I could lay them out, but that doesn’t mean that they were mine or me. There was a falsity in expressing them. I couldn’t tell, for a while, because I would say things, and part of me would be all critical about what I was saying: "you don’t believe that; that’s not accurate; it’s kind of a lie." It was saying that to almost everything I said. I took a risk: I thought, "OK, I’m going to assume that the part of me that’s critical about what I’m saying is right," even though that was terrible, because, often, it meant I could hardly speak. And then I learned to only say things that didn’t make me feel weak; and then I decided that that’s what I was going to do. So I’ve been careful with what I’ve been saying, for a long time.

BW: I’m having a hard time with what you’re saying right now, because shouldn’t the test be, "I’m only saying things that are true," not, "I’m only saying things that don’t make me feel weak"? What am I misunderstanding in that formulation?

JP: Well, what you’re misunderstanding, in part, is—how do you know the things that you’re saying aren’t true? I would say, one of the ways you know is they weaken you, and you can learn that. You can learn to feel that. Carl Rogers talked about this a lot in his work of psychotherapy. He said that one of the primary roles of a psychotherapist is to be congruent, and what he meant by that was that there was no disjunction between what you felt in a situation, let’s say, and what you said—that it was all one piece. That was an embodied unity, not merely a conceptual unity. So I really do think that there’s something to it.

BW: You almost mean psychologically weak, not weak in terms of power?

JP: I mean psychologically weak. I mean morally weak. I mean weak in character. That sort of thing. So I got very careful with what I said, and, at the same time, I was spending a tremendous amount of time writing. I was very careful with what I wrote. So, in Maps of Meaning, I think I rewrote every sentence in that book at least fifty times.

BW: That’s crazy.

JP: Oh, yeah. That’s for sure. I would take a sentence out and write a bunch of variants of it, and then I would pick the variant that was best, and then I’d try to come up with all the arguments I could about why the sentence was stupid and wrong.

BW: Please don’t tell me you still do this.

JP: Yeah. I still do this when I’m writing.

BW: Did you do 15 versions of every sentence for 12 Rules for Life, also?

JP: I said "fifty".

BW: Oh, fifty. Excuse me. I meant to be precise in my speech, but I…

JP: It was more like 15, with 12 Rules for Life, so it was less. But I’m a better writer than I was, then, so I didn’t have to do it quite as often. I kept writing it, until I couldn’t make the sentences any better. That doesn't mean they were good: it just meant I got to the point where, if I was rewriting them, it wasn’t obvious the rewriting was better than the original sentence. So then I had to stop.

BW: So my question a few minutes ago was, "how has knowing that your words are going to be intentionally twerked changed you?"

JP: Well, it’s made me evermore careful. It’s exaggerated the care. But I had been quite careful, and the evidence for that is quite clear. When all of this political controversy around me, and that swirled around me—well, it still is. Maybe it’s even exaggerated, to some degree. But it was very intense, in Canada, for a good six months, and people were going over what I had put on YouTube, with a fine-toothed comb. There was 200 hours of videos, there. And you think, "well, with some creative editing, and with motivation and mind, you’d think, if you went over 200 hours of someone’s lectures, you could find a smoking pistol, even if you had to chop out a sentence." No one found anything, and the reason for that was—there wasn’t anything there. That’s why they didn’t find anything.

So I had already been very careful, and I had discussed all sorts of unbelievably contentious issues. My classes were very intense. The Maps of Meaning class, in particular… Its basic presupposition—partly what I was trying to do with my students was convince them that, had they been in Nazi Germany in the 1930s, they wouldn’t have been on the side of the good. That’s a hell of a thing to drag people through, but it’s, statistically, overwhelmingly likely. So it’s a very serious class, and certainly a place where you could step badly at any given moment. I talked about gender differences, and the biological substructure of consciousness, and all these things that could easily become politically contentious. But, as I said, there weren’t any smoking pistols. But now, for the last two years, I’ve been more careful—and I have people watching me. My family watches me and what I’m doing. They keep very careful track of it, and if I deviate a little bit from how I should have behaved, then they tell me—and I have friends who are doing the same thing—and I listen to them.

BW: Do you feel you deviated from how you should behave, when you said of, I think it was Mishra, in the New York Review of Books…

JP: No.

BW: Well, let me just share what you said. I’m trying to be precise in my speech, but I believe you said, "you’re a sanctimonious prick, and if you were in my room, I’d slap you." You don’t regret that?

JP: Not a bit, and I’ll tell you why. It’s really complicated, you know? I have this friend, who’s a native carver. He comes from a very rough background—like, way rougher than you think. Maybe some of you have come from rough backgrounds, or you know people who have come from them, but he comes from a plenty rough background. I started working with him, buying his art, 15 years ago. He was a survivor of residential schools in Canada. We got pretty close. He helped me design the third floor of my house. Anyways, the long and short of it was that I got inducted into his family, about a year and a half ago, in this big ceremony up in a native reservation, in northern Vancouver. We’ve been through a lot together, and a lot of it’s been pretty rough. This whatever the hell his name was, Mishrash, or whatever the hell his name was, had the temerity to say that I was "romancing the noble savage". It’s like, "watch your step, buddy. You don’t know what the hell you’re talking about, not even a bit."

Had I been a left-leaning personage, and he had made a comment like that, there would have been hell to pay—which isn’t to say that I’m a right-leaning personage, by the way. So I don’t regret it a bit. I think what he said was absolutely reprehensible, and that he should have been called out on it. So I don’t regret it at all. Now, people said, maybe it would have been better for me not to have made that comment. It’s possible that they’re right, but I actually thought about it, and I thought, "there’s no excuse for that. You don’t know what you’re talking about. You’re meddling with things you don’t understand, and you’re making a casual aspersion not only on me, but on my ‘noble savage’ friend." Yeah—no.

BW: So, speaking of things that people have said, sort of, to defame you, you’re currently suing Wilfrid Laurier University. Correct me if I’m wrong, but I think administrators, there, in their meeting with Lindsay Shepherd, who was a TA, who showed a clip of you—they sort of interrogated her, accusing her of creating a hostile teaching environment, for showing a clip of you in her classroom. During that interaction, which she recorded, they compared you to Hitler.

JP: No, they compared me to Hitler or Milo Yiannopoulos. It’s important, and the reason it’s important is because…

BW: Just to finish that question—maybe you’ll braid this in. You are one of the most outspoken champions, I would say, of free speech right now. I would like for you, if you can, to sort of grapple a bit with believing in free speech so strongly, and yet also suing this university for slander.

JP: First of all, they said playing a clip of Jordan Peterson was like playing a clip of Hitler or Milo Yiannopoulos. I thought, "well, let’s go a little easy on the Hitler comparisons, there, guys. You might want to save that for when it’s really necessary, because you don’t use…" It’s sacrilegious to use an insult like that, except in situations where it’s justified. It’s not appropriate to use a catastrophe like that casually, especially when you’re doing it under the guise of moral virtue. There’s no excuse for it. And then the second thing is, "you’re a professor, both of you. Which is it? Am I Hitler, or am I Milo Yiannopoulos?" Seriously. Those are not the same people, in case you didn’t notice. One was the worst barbarian in the 20th century, with the possible exception of Stalin and Mao, and the other one is a provocateur trickster, who’s quite quick on his feet, and is… what would you say… stirring things up in a relatively non-problematic way. They’re not the same creature. So to combine them in a single, careless insult during an administrative investigation—which was entirely unwarranted, by the way, and was predicated on an absolute lie: there hadn’t been a student complaint, as the university admitted. There’s no excuse for that, and, if they weren’t professors, it wouldn’t have been so bad. But they were.

The reason I sued them—there’s a whole bunch of reasons. The Hitler comparison and the Milo Yiannopoulos comparison were only two of about 40 things that they tarred me with, and they’re all listed in the deposition. The only reason I brought the lawsuit forward—what, seven months later; something like that—was because of what happened with Lindsay Shepherd. What happened to her at Wilfrid Laurier is absolutely inexcusable. Everything they did to her was predicated on a lie. Then the university apologized, and so did the professor. And then he lied during his apology, which was a forced apology anyways, and therefore of very little utility. They were subject to no disciplinary action, even though the statutes of the university required it, and they made Lindsay Shepherd’s life a living hell, even after they apologized to her and told her that she did nothing wrong, and that they hadn’t followed their own procedures.

I read her deposition, and I actually read it on YouTube, where it’s got about 500,000 views, by the way. I thought, "you people haven't learned anything. You’ve learned absolutely nothing. And so, if one lawsuit doesn’t convince you, maybe two will." And so then, with regards to free speech: free speech is still bounded inside the structure of law, and these people broke the law—or, at least, that’s my claim. So I don’t see the contradiction, there, at all. You can’t just slander someone, defame them, lie about them. You can’t incite people to crime. There’s all sorts of reasonable restrictions on free speech that are already codified, essentially, in the British common law system. Wilfrid Laurier learned nothing, but this isn’t over yet.

BW: But isn’t it creating a chilling effect, which is something that those of us who care so much about free speech want to, sort of, stay away from? You could say these sort of defamation lawsuits are a really, really dangerous slippery slope. I’m kind of surprised you don’t see it that way.

JP: Well, I do see it that way, which is why I spent seven months thinking about it, before I decided to do it. But I thought that there’s always risk, in every decision: there’s the risk of doing something, and there’s the risk of not doing something. Both of those risks are usually catastrophic, in every decision you make in life. I weighed up the risks, and I thought, "nope. The risk, here, of not doing something is greater than the risk of doing something." Had they shown any sign—look, one of the things that Wilfrid Laurier did in the aftermath of this scandal, which, by the way, was the biggest scandal that ever hit a Canadian university by a large margin. It was an international scandal. I rarely go places where people haven’t heard about this, so it was a big deal.

They had plenty to learn, and they learned nothing. They had set up a panel, hypothetically, on free speech and its relationship on inclusivity et cetera. The only two people on the panel who were advocating for the free speech position resigned in frustration, and I know that because I know who they are. And so, well, that’s just one of the pieces of evidence that they didn’t learn anything. They continued to mistreated Shepherd, continually. Her deposition—it’s like a novel of stupidity. My sense was, had there been any sign whatsoever of, let’s call it, true apology and procedural rectification, she would have left them alone, and so would have I. But there was zero. In fact, if anything, what they did was double down and go underground: "here’s our apology. Here’s our procedures." That’s what they showed the world. "Here’s how nothing at all has changed." No: not good enough.

BW: Since we’re on the subject of universities, you recently said that what universities have done is "beyond forgiveness". I wondered if you could explain what you mean by that—and a second, connected question: should we abolish universities?

JP: No, they’ll do that themselves.

BW: OK. Let’s hear a little bit about what they’ve done that you think renders them beyond forgiveness.

JP: Well, they’re overwhelmingly administratively top-heavy; and they don’t spend any more money on the faculty than they did 30 years ago; and the cost of that administrative top-heaviness, which is well documented—not by me, by other people—has accelerated over the last 20 years. There has been a radical increase in tuition fees, especially compared to the radical decrease in the price of most things over the last 20 years. So they’ve become administratively top-heavy—and this is especially true in the United States. The way that’s been managed is that unsuspecting students are given free access to student loans that will cripple them through their 30s and their 40s, and the universities are enticing them to extend their carefree adolescence for a four-year period, at the cost of mortgaging their future earnings, in a deal that does not allow for escape through bankruptcy. So it’s, essentially, a form of indentured servitude.

There’s no excuse whatsoever for that. It means the administrators have learned how to pick the future pockets of their students, and, because they also view them, in some sense, as sacred cash cows and fragile, let’s say—because you might wonder why the students are being treated like they’re so fragile. It’s like, "well, we don’t want them to drop out, now do we? If they drop out, then we don’t get our hands on their future earnings, in a way they can’t escape from." That cripples the economy, because the students come out overladen with debt that they’ll never pay off, right at the time when they should be right at the peak of their ability to take entrepreneurial risks. So they can’t do that, because they’re too crippled by debt. That’s absolutely appalling.

They’re gerrymandering the accredited processes, so that the degree no longer has its credible value. They’re enabling the activist disciplines, which have zero academic credibility whatsoever in my estimation, and I’m perfectly willing to defend that claim. By enabling the activist disciplines, they’re allowing for the distribution of this absolutely nonsensical view that Western society is fundamentally a patriarchal tyranny, which is absurd on at least five dimensions of analysis, but is becoming increasing the thing you have to believe, if you’re allowed to speak in public. What else… Well, that’s a good start. They’re not teaching students to read critically. They’re not introducing them to great literature. They’re not teaching them to write. The list goes on and on and on.

BW: Do you think, in a way, that you are a symbol of higher education’s failure? Meaning, the reason, maybe, that people are showing up—5,000 people to listen to you. It’s going to be 20,000 in London, in July—is because there aren’t that many people who, unironically, are talking about what it is to live a good life, and asking questions about how to live a meaningful one? If you would say that in most universities, I feel that you would be laughed out of the room.

JP: Well, it depends on how you said it, and to whom. But if you say it to students, then they’re so happy to listen to you that they can hardly stand it, because even the most cynical students come to university hoping there’s something there worth learning. The reason that they’re exposed to great literature, for example—because there is such a thing. It’s not all power claims—is because great literature contains the key to wisdom, and you need wisdom to be able to live without undo suffering. So, yes. Would I say that what happened to me is a reflection of the failure of the universities… It is, in part. Although, I did teach this…

BW: And not just you: the whole Intellectual Dark Web. The fact that people listen to Sam Harris talk for hours. I mean, all of these people…

JP: Well, you want to go for the simple solutions, before you go for the complex ones; and you want to go for the solutions that are associated with ignorance, rather than malevolence, first. I would say that we don’t want to underestimate the degree to which what’s happening with YouTube and with podcasts, as a consequence of a technological revolution. I’ve known for years that the universities underserve the community. For some reason, we think that university education is for 18- to 22-year-olds, which is a proposition that’s so absurd that it’s absolutely mind boggling that anyone ever conceptualized it. It’s like, "why wouldn’t you take university courses throughout your entire life? What, do you stop searching for wisdom when you’re 22?" I don’t think so. You don’t even start, usually, until you’re, like, in your mid-20s.

I knew the universities were underserving the broader community a long time ago, but there wasn’t a mechanism by which that could be rectified, apart from, say, books. Of course, that was part of the rectification. So I think you don’t want to underestimate the technological transformation. And then I would also say—I mean, I was teaching this in university, so it isn’t like there isn’t anybody in universities still teaching this sort of thing. There are plenty of qualified professors, who are still doing a good job. But they’re being pushed out very rapidly, and terrified, as well, by the activist disciplines.

BW: You speak and write a lot about how masculinity is in crisis. What are some of the main signs of it—and then we’ll open it up to questions soon—and is Trump a symbol of that crisis, or a corrective to it?

JP: Well, I don’t really think that masculinity is in crisis. I think that, to the degree that masculinity per se is regarded as toxic, that will produce a crisis, which isn’t the same thing. I think there’s a crisis of meaning, let’s say, in our culture, but that’s not new. That’s been the case for quite a long time, but I don’t think it’s specific to masculinity. That’s been a story that’s kind of aggregated around me, and the way that happened was, well, the people who don’t like what I’m saying look at my audience, and they say, "oh, well, he’s speaking mostly to men. Therefore he must be speaking to men." It’s like, "no: the baseline rates for YouTube utilization are about 80 per cent male, so the fact that most of the people who are watching me on YouTube were male is an artefact, to some degree, that most of the people who watch YouTube are male."

Now, it may also be that the sorts of things that I’m saying are more pertinent to men—although, I’m not convinced of that. Most of the students throughout my university career have been women, because psychology is dominated by women, to a great degree. Ever since I published my book, the proportion of people who are coming to lectures that is female is reliably increasing. It’s probably up to about 35 per cent, I would say, now, from, probably, about 20. I don’t think it is a message that is particularly germane to men, although it is germane to men. I don’t think that there’s, like, an independent crisis of masculinity.

There might be a crisis of concepts of masculinity, and I think that’s hard on young men, in some ways. The reason for that is you’re supposed to be duty bound, as a virtuous person, to buy the doctrine of the tyrannical patriarchy. It’s like, well, look. First of all, every hierarchical system tends towards tyranny. That’s a universal truism. Our structures have the same problem, obviously, and we have to be eternally vigilant, so they don’t devolve into tyranny. But that doesn’t mean that they are tyrannies and always have been. Of course, also, compared to what? Compared to your hypothetical ideological utopia? Yes. Compared to every other society that’s ever existed on the planet, including most of the ones that exist now? Definitively not. But anyways, if you buy that idiotic unidimensional idea, which is a pathological error, and you see your culture as a tyrannical patriarchy, then you see any attempt to move up that hierarchy as a manifestation of patriarchal tyranny.

The problem is that a lot of ways you move up a modern, functional hierarchy is through competence, and if you take young men—it doesn’t happen as much with young women, for reasons we can go into—and you say, "every manifestation of your desire to move up the hierarchy is nothing but proof of your participating in the tyrannical patriarchy," then you tend to demoralize them, which is exactly what you’re trying to do, by the way, if you take that stance to begin with. I really think that, at the bottom of the most pathological manifestations of the collectivist dictum, is the assault on the idea of competence itself. That’s another unforgivable sin that the university has committed. There’s no doubt that human hierarchies are error prone, and they tilt towards tyranny. Obviously. But that doesn’t mean that they are unidimensional patriarchal tyrannies. They’re neither patriarchal nor tyrannies, but that’s received wisdom, now, and to question that means that you're a misogynistic fascist. So I tell young men, it’s like, "no, no, no. There’s something to competence, man."

BW: Speaking as a woman who has read your book—and I’m with you for so much of it, and then you start to lose me, when you talk about archetypes. The way you talk about archetypes in the book—and, again, forgive me if I’m being slightly imprecise, but I’m trying to gloss it for an audience who might not have read it—is that, in this sort of Jungian archetypal world, chaos is feminine, order is masculine; and the subtitle of your book is "An Antidote to Chaos". So, as a woman reading that… I’d like for you to explain to me, maybe, what I’m missing, there, because that’s when you started to lose me a little bit, as a reader. Why does there need to be an antidote to the feminine in that way?

JP: Well, there has to be an antidote to anything that’s manifesting itself in excess. It’s chaos that’s manifesting itself in excess at the moment, in our culture, and so that’s what I decided to address in this book. Mostly that was because, I suppose, it was addressed, at least in part, to younger people; and what younger people have to contend with, generally speaking, is an excess of chaos, because they’re not very disciplined. We kind of have this idea that, well, you’re free as a child, and then you… Let me see if I can put this properly… That you have a certain delightful, wonderful, positive freedom as a child, and then that’s given up, as you approach adulthood. But the truth of the matter is that you have a lot of potential as a child, but none of that is capable of manifesting itself as freedom, before you become disciplined; and discipline is a matter of the imposition of order, and the order is necessary, especially for people who are hopeless and nihilistic, and lots of people are hopeless and nihilistic—way more people than you think. Part of that is because no one’s ever really encouraged them.

The book is, in part, a matter of encouragement. It’s like, "lay a disciplinary structure on yourself. Get the chaos in check. And then you can move towards a state that’s freer, because it’s discipline first." If you’re going to become a concert pianist, there’s going to be several thousand hours of extraordinarily disciplined practice. That’s the imposition of order on your potential, let’s say. But what comes out of that is a much grander freedom. And so, virtually every freedom that you have in life that’s true freedom is purchased at the price of discipline. Because I think that it’s nihilism and hopelessness that constitute the major existential threat—especially to young people, at the moment—then I was concentrating on the necessity of discipline and order.

The issue with regards to the metaphysical or symbolic representation of chaos as feminine… Well, that’s a very complex problem. The first thing you have to understand is that there’s no a priori supposition that order is preferable to chaos, in any fundamental sense. They’re not constituent elements of reality. You can’t say one’s bad and the other’s good. You can say that they can become unbalanced, and that’s definitely not good. Too much chaos is not good, obviously. Too much order is not good, equally obviously. Those are the two extremes you have to negotiate between. I’m not making a casual claim, with regards to the idea that reality is an amalgam of chaos and order.

I don’t think there is any more accurate way of describing the nature of reality. That's the most fundamental… Maybe not "the" most fundamental truth, but it’s certainly… There’s two. There’s two fundamental truths: reality is composed of chaos and order, and your role is to mediate between them successfully. That’s metaphysical and symbolic truth—but it’s more than that, because that’s actually how your mind and your brain is organized: not only conceptually, but emotionally, motivationally, and physiologically. I don’t really understand how that can be, because it isn’t obvious to me how the most fundamental elements of reality can be chaos and order. But the evidence that that is the case is overwhelming.

I can give you a quick example, which is quite interesting. So you have two hemispheres. There’s a reason for that. The fundamental reason for that is that one of them is adapted for things you don’t understand—that’s, roughly speaking, the right hemisphere—and the other is adapted for things you do understand—that’s the left hemisphere. And so that's a chaos-order dichotomy. The fact that you’re adapted to that, that the very structure of your brain reflects that bifurcation, indicates, as far as I can tell, beyond a shadow of a doubt—because it’s also characteristic of nonhuman animals, many of them—that that differentiation is fundamentally true, in some sense.

Now you might ask, "well, why is that conceptualized as masculine versus feminine?" because it’s not male versus female, by the way. Those are not the same thing, because one is conceptual. That’s extraordinarily complicated. I think the reason is that we’re social, cognitive primates, and that our fundamental a priori cognitive categories are masculine, feminine, and child. It's something like that. That’s the fundamental structure of reality, because we’re social creatures, and we view reality as something that’s, essentially, social in its nature. And then, when we started to conceptualize reality outside of the social world—which wasn’t very long ago, by the way, and which is something that animals virtually don’t do at all—we used those a priori social categories as filters, through which we interpreted the external world. We’re sort of stuck with that, in some deep sense.

You might say, "well, why do we have to be stuck with that?" "Well, because some things are very difficult to change." If you go watch a story, and the characters in the story slot themselves into those archetypical categories, then you’ll understand the stories, and if they don’t, you won’t, because your understanding is predicated on application of the archetypal a prioris to the story. You wouldn’t understand it otherwise, so you can’t get under that. There’s no "under" that—not to remain human. I can give you a quick example. I like to use Disney movies for a variety of reasons, mostly because everyone knows them. But it's not accidental that the evil queen in Sleeping Beauty is not an accidental character: she’s the way she is because we understand her, and the reason we understand her is because we see the world in the categories that I just laid out.

BW: Are you saying she has to be a queen, and not a king?

JP: No. If she was an evil king, she’d be different. She’d be like Scar in The Lion King. He’s just as evil, man, but not the same character, right?

BW: Yeah. I guess I’m struck that it seems like a lot of your intellectual project is reasserting difference in an age where we’re told that everything is the same, and that it’s almost indecent to say..

JP: It’s stupid.

BW: OK.

JP: Sorry to be so blunt, but look, the problem with some of this—some of it’s wilful blindness, but some it’s just ignorance. So let me just lay out a couple of things. For example, I’ve been taken to task, along, let’s say, with James Damore, who had actually been highly influenced by my videos and my classes, before he did what he did at Google. I’ve studied personality differences between men and women for 25 years and written papers on the topic. It’s actually an area of expertise of mine, and substantial expertise, too—and not pseudoscience expertise, thank you very much. I’m not a pseudoscientist. My publication record puts me in the top .5 per cent of psychologists, so I’m not a pseudoscientist by any stretch of the imagination. I have 10,000 citations—and that’s not a million, but it’s a lot—and a hundred published papers.

Let me lay out one of the personality differences between men and women, because it’s worth understanding. You might say, "well, there can’t be personality differences between men and women, because that’s anti-feminist." It’s like, "no, it’s not. We might have to actually understand that there are differences between men and women, so that we can let men and women make the choices they’re going to make without subjecting them to undo manipulations." One of the reliable differences between men and women cross culturally is that men are more aggressive than women. Now, what’s the evidence for that? Here’s one piece of evidence: there are 10 times as many men in prison. What’s that, a sociocultural construct? No, it’s not a sociocultural construct. OK, here’s another piece of data: women try to commit suicide more than men, by a lot, and that’s because women are more prone to depression and anxiety than men are, and there’s a reasons for that, and that's cross culturally true, as well. They're more likely to try to commit suicide, but men are way more likely to actually commit suicide. Why? Because they’re more aggressive, so they use lethal means.

OK, so now the question is, "how much more aggressive than women?" The answer is, "not very much." So the claim that men and women are more the same than different is actually true, but this is where you have to know something about statistics to actually understand the way the world works, instead of just applying your a priori ideological presupposition to things that are too complex to fit in that rubric. So, if you drew two people out a crowd, one man and one woman, and you had to lay a bet on who was more aggressive, and you bet on the woman, you’d win 40 per cent of the time. OK, so that’s quite a lot. It’s not 50 per cent of the time, which would be no difference whatsoever, but it’s quite a lot. So there are lots of women who are more aggressive than lots of men. So the curves overlap a lot: there’s way more similarity than difference, and this is along the dimension where there's the most difference, by the way. But here’s the problem: you can take small differences at the average of a distribution; the distributions move off to the side; and then, all the action’s at the tail.

So here’s the situation. You don’t care about how aggressive the average person is. It’s not that relevant. What you care about is, "who is the most aggressive person out of 100?" You take 100 people, and you take the most aggressive person, because that's the person you better watch out for. What’s the gender? Men, because if you go three standard deviations out from the mean on two curves that overlap but are slightly disjointed, then you derive an overwhelming preponderance of the overrepresented group. That’s why men are about 10 times more likely to be in prison. It has nothing to do with socialization. And then there are other differences, too.

It turns out that differences in aggression and agreeableness also predict differences in interest. So it turns out that men are more interested, in average, in things than women are; and women are more interested in people, on average. That’s actually the biggest difference that’s been measured between men and women. It has nothing to do with ability. It has to do with interest. The way that manifests itself is that women are more likely to go into disciplines that are characterized by the care of others, and you can tell that by the way occupations are segregating. All you have to do is look at the data for, like, 15 minutes: women overwhelmingly dominate health care, and that’s accelerating, by the way. Men dominate engineering, let’s say. You say, "that’s sociocultural." It’s like, "no, it’s not, and here’s the proof." You want to test this hypothesis, right? The other thing you want to understand is that left-leaning psychologists generated this data. You think, "well, how do you know that?" That’s easy: there are no right-leaning psychologists…

BW: Except for you.

JP: Well, that’s what people say.

BW: I’m on stage with the only one!

JP: …and that’s been well documented. People have published this data despite their ideological proclivities, and despite the fact that this is not what they expected to find, or what they wanted to find. What you do, now, is you stack countries by how egalitarian their social policies are, from the least egalitarian to the most. You say, "well, the Scandinavian countries are the most egalitarian"—and, by the way, if we don’t agree on that, then there’s no sense in having this discussion at all, because we don’t agree on what "egalitarian" means. If you don’t think what the Scandinavians have done is move in the direction of egalitarianism, then I have no idea what you mean by "egalitarianism". Now, you could say, "well, they haven’t done it perfectly." It’s like, "yeah, yeah, it’s true, but it’s not relevant to this argument." So what you do is you stack countries by how egalitarian their social policies are, and then you look at occupational and personality differences between men and women as a function of the country.

What you find is, as the country becomes more egalitarian, the differences between men and women increase. They don’t decrease. What that means is that the radical social constructionists are wrong. It’s not a few studies with a couple of people, done by some half-wit psychologists in some tiny universities. It’s population-level studies that have been published in major journals, that have been cited by thousands of people. It’s not pseudoscience. It’s not questioned by mainstream psychometricians and personality theorists. We figured this out back in, like, 1995. Everyone thought it was settled. So what’s the big problem? Well, who knows what the big problem is. The outcome is not exactly the same between the genders. It’s like, "who says it has to be?" And, more importantly—and this is something to ask yourself constantly—"just who the hell’s going to enforce that? And just how exactly are they going to enforce that?"

Believe me, it’s not going to be in some manner that you like, because there are differences between men and women, and, if you leave them alone, those differences manifest themselves in different occupational choices: that’s the other finding. This is a newer one: as the societies become more egalitarian, the occupational choices between men and women maximize. What that means is that fewer and fewer women go into the STEM fields. Now, no one wanted that. No one predicted it. No one was hoping for it. It actually flew in the face of, I would say, the most established psychological theories. My presupposition certainly was, 20 years ago, that what would have happened, as we made societies more egalitarian, would be that men and women would converge.

That’s not what happened. The biological differences maximized, as we eliminated the sociocultural differences. Maybe you don’t like that. That’s fine with me. I didn’t say I liked it. But whether or not I like a piece of data has very little bearing on whether or not I’m liable to accept it. I’m trying to look at the damn scientific literature, and to draw the conclusions that are necessitated by the data. And then you can say, "well, the whole thing is suspect, because it’s the construction of the patriarchal tyrants who generated the Eurocentric scientific viewpoints." It’s like, "if you want to have that conversation, then go to an activist discipline and have it, because it’s not the sort of conversation that anyone sensible would engage in."

BW: I’d love to open up the room to questions. Please: sensible questions, and please keep them short.

JP: Or not sensible.

BW: But genuine questions. Someone with a microphone will find you, if you raise your hand.

Q1: Hi, good evening. My name is [inaudible]. I wanted to understand a little bit of your view, more, on the fact that—not fact, but at least observation, that over generations and generations… at least what I’ve heard and seen from my family, I can take up that women being told about their position in the home and men being told their position to work, and be a little more aggressive, you know? The social conditioning. So how does that play a role? because I didn’t hear that being a dimension of reaching these conclusions.

JP: Well, I never claimed that the differences between men and women were 100 per cent biologically determined. There are biological influences. The radical constructionist make the opposite claim: "there are no biological differences between men and women." First of all, that’s so preposterous that it barely even requires an answer, but you might specify it a bit, and say, "no, there are no biological differences that manifest themselves psychologically." That’s not quite as preposterous, but it’s also incorrect. It’s obviously the case that all sorts of things about sex roles and gender roles, let’s say, are conditioned by sociocultural mechanisms, because human beings are very, very plastic. And so the manner in which those biological differences manifest themselves in a culture is radically influenced by the nature of the culture, but that doesn’t mean that the biological influences don’t exist.

BW: But are you saying—should we be countering that, sort of, traditional cultural mores?

Q1: What I still don’t understand is—like, at one point you’re saying it’s not necessarily biological or inherent, if I do paraphrase it.

JP: Well, some of it is.

Q1: Yeah, but it’s very unclear in the way, at least, [inaudible] is very short, and maybe it means a larger discussion. It seems that it’s easy to deduce that these are inherent differences which exist, and social conditioning wasn’t taken as a parameter.

JP: That’s controlled for by the comparison between societies that have different levels of egalitarianism built into their social structure. It’s all taken care of in the analysis: if the biological differences manifest themselves maximally where the sociocultural influences to equalize gender are maximal, then, obviously, the biological differences are powerful and profound. It’s conclusive. So it’s taken into account in the data analysis. That’s why you stack up the countries. The egalitarian nature of their social policies is to control for the sociocultural influence. You gotta admit—just think it through, for a minute. It isn’t even that—what you would have expected, theoretically, is that the societies that are the least egalitarian would have the biggest differences between men and women, and that, as the societies got more and more egalitarian, those differences would get smaller, and maybe disappear, even. But that isn’t what happened.

Exactly the opposite is what happened: they maximized in the most egalitarian societies. Therefore the social constructionist position—the radical social constructionist position—is wrong. It’s wrong. It’s been refuted, which is partly why the radical social constructionists have taken the legislative route to impose their viewpoint. They lost the scientific war: "well, then we can just attack science. It’s science itself that’s suspect." "Well, then quit using your iPhones." Well, if you’re going to have your convictions, man, lay them out in your life. If you think the scientific process is suspect and tyrannical and oppressive, and all that, then quit using the products that it produces. You don’t get to have your cake and eat it, too.

BW: Let’s go to this young woman, right here.

Q2: Hi, my name’s Julia, and I recently read in The New York Times an article about your comment on forced monogamy. What are your comments on how that was perceived by the public and, specifically, the left?

BW: Great question. I think it was "enforced monogamy", though.

JP: Yeah: "enforced monogamy". First of all, that’s a technical term, by the way. That’s been used in the anthropological literature for a hundred years. The journalist, who was not stupid, knew that perfectly well, and reported the story the way she reported it despite that. But what’s even more surreal about that story is that, if you’re going to try to undermine someone’s credibility and do it effectively, you should attribute to them an extreme view that some person, somewhere, actually holds. OK, so the view that was attributed to me was something like, "I want to…

BW: The road to The Handmaid’s Tale.

JP: Exactly: "I want to find useless men and distribute women to them at the point of a gun, so that they don’t become violent." It’s like, no one has ever believed that, ever, anywhere.

BW: Except Margaret Atwood.

JP: That’s right. She wrote a book about that. But, so, it’s just absolutely preposterous. It’s preposterous in a bunch of ways, because she interviewed me for about two days, and we talked about that for about two minutes. It was a peripheral conversation. It’s an anthropological truism—generated primarily by scholars on the left, just so everyone’s clear about it—that societies that use monogamy as a social norm—which, by the way, is virtually every human society that’s ever existed—do that in an attempt to control the aggression that goes along with polygamy. It’s like, "oh, my God! How contentious can you get?" Well, how many of you are in monogamous relationships? Well, the majority. How is that enforced?

BW: I think this is a very polyamorous room, having a looking around.

JP: So it was just… It was desperate. That’s what it looked like to me. The problem is, it was also desperate and amateurish. She could have done a much better job with a much less extreme characterization. It’s like, "oh, yes: I want to take women at the point of a gun and distribute them to useless men." It’s so stupid, partly because, if she would have been reasonable—and she knew this, too—one of the things I’ve told men specifically, over and over and over and over, is, "if you’re being rejected by all the women that you approach, it’s not the women!" Right.

These characters, like the guy who mowed down those people in Toronto—he ends up blaming women. He’s blaming more than women: in some sense, he’s blaming the structure of Being, for producing women that reject him. That’s part of what makes him violent. It’s like, "well, what the hell’s wrong with him?" He’s got it completely backwards. If everyone you talked to was boring, it’s not them, right? So, if you’re rejected by the opposite sex—assuming that you’re heterosexual—then you’re wrong: they’re not wrong, and you’ve got some work to do, man. You’ve got some difficult work to do.

There isn’t anything I’ve been telling, let’s say, young men, that’s clearer than that. It’s actually something I’ve been criticized by, by people on the left. They think I don’t take structural inequality, for example, and so forth, into account sufficiently. What I’ve been telling people is, "take the responsibility for your failure onto yourself." That certainly applies to, well, especially when you’re trying to formulate a relationship, and you’re getting rejected left, right and center. That’s a hint that you have some work to do. Now, it might also be a hint that you're just young and useless, and why the hell would anybody have anything to do with you, because you don’t have anything to offer. But that’s rectified, and, partly, even maturity rectifies that. So not only was that… what would you call it… "accusation" surreal and absurd, made by a journalist who knew perfectly well what I was suggesting and chose to misrepresent it anyways, the conclusion that people derive from that is exactly the opposite of what I’d been suggesting, in particular, to young men. So it’s absolutely preposterous.

Q3: Professor Peterson, I teach students. I teach trans students, and I’m asked, often, to call people singularly "they". It started, probably, about four years ago. It struck me as very odd. I’m 52. Some of them, you can tell that it’s coming from a very deep place, and that’s how they feel, and they deeply need to be called "they". Some of them, my horse sense says that they’re kind of enjoying giving me a certain shock, and that there’s a certain theatrical aspect. It’s my horse sense that there’s a certain [inaudible] aspect to it. I kind of feel it, and I’m probably right. But I can’t know. I’m a linguist; I’m a person; and my general feeling has been, "whatever they ask, just go with it, and let’s change our usage of the pronouns, because we have a lot to do."

Now, what you said was interesting. What you said was that the way you make the difference in deciding these cases is based on the fact that you have psychological training, and that you can tell. What I want to know is—for my own elucidation, and also because I think many of us wondered, but then it kind of went by—how do you know? Now, I want to specify: I’d rather you didn’t recount the whole episode of how ridiculously you were treated amidst that whole controversy.

JP: Sure.

Three quarters of the room knows. I sympathize with you. I thought it was ridiculous. I want to know specifically, because I’m a linguist. You have psychological training. How would you know? And if you hear—I’m almost done—a tiny bit of scepticism in my voice, you’re correct. However, I am open to being convinced. Based on your training, which is immense, how would you know which students to discount, as opposed to which ones to go along with?

JP: OK, first of all, I wouldn’t "know", right? which is partly why your scepticism is justified. But I have to be responsible for what I say, based on my willingness to take responsibility for my judgment. So I would be willing to do that, despite the fact that I could be wrong. But, having said that, in any reasonable situation, I would err on the side of addressing the person in the manner they requested to be addressed. But that’s not the issue for me: the issue is, now I’m compelled by law to do so. It’s like, "no, not doing it—not now, because it’s compelled by law." So that’s the end of the game, as far as I’m concerned. There is no excuse for compelling it by law.

That’s my position, and I think there’s all sorts of reasons for that. I don’t think it was an isolated legislative move. I think it’s part and parcel of a whole sequence of legislative moves that have been made and continue to be made in Canada. I think it’s an attempt by a certain radical ideology to gain the linguistic upper hand, which I think is a terrible thing to do—to allow. So I had lots of reasons for rejecting the legislation. But it had nothing to do with…

Q3: I asked about how your psychological training would make the difference. That’s very interesting. We’re talking about expertise, here, and my ears pricked up, when you talked about how there is a way of thinking that would allow us to decide.

JP: No: there’s a way of thinking that would allow me to decide, for me.

Q3: No: us to decide, for us. Surely you have a larger mission than just what’s going on in your own head, and I mean that.

JP: No: I had a perfectly straightforward mission, which was, "there was no damn way I was going to say those words, when I was compelled to by law." That was my mission.

Q3: You weren’t trying to model for the rest of us a way of thinking? It was, really, only about you?

JP: It was about me and the law. I thought the lawmakers had gone too far. They’d stepped out of their appropriate territory, into the domain of linguistic freedom. As far as I was concerned, I wasn’t going to put up with that. And so, if people were happy about that and wanted to follow the example, that was fine with them. But for me, it was something—and that was the statement: "I’m not doing this." And then people can draw their own conclusions from that. Maybe they want to do it. I’ve spoken to no shortage of trans people. My proclivity has been, without exception, so far, to address them in the manner that seems most socially appropriate under the circumstances. Now, you asked a specific question, which was, "do I have special expertise that I might share with other people?"

Q3: Because you’re doing Martin Luther, and I think that these issues are a little subtler than those.

JP: What makes you think that you’re doing the kids that are grandstanding any favours, by going along with their manipulation?

Q3: Because I can’t decide which ones those are. I just have my gut instinct, and that’s not good enough.

JP: Fair enough, but you have a type one and a type two error problem. One error is that you don’t call students what they deserve to be called. That’s one error. The other error is that you call students what they want to be called, even though they don’t deserve it. So what you’re trying to do, optimally, is trying to minimize both those errors. To do that, you have to take a middle route. Now, what you’ve decided to do—and I’m not criticizing it—is to allow for the possibility 100 per cent of one of those errors, because you think it’s a less significant error. You might be right. But it’s not like you’re acting in an error-free manner: you’ve just decided to minimize one form of error at the expense of the other. I would say you’re allowing attention-seeking and somewhat narcissistic undergraduates to gain the upper hand over you in your class. Believe me, it’s not a criticism. I understand why you’re doing it.

Q3: Professor Peterson…

BW: Isn’t John just erring on the side of generosity?

Q3: …I have one more thing to say…

JP: Sure.

Q3: …because I’m not going to take up any more space.

JP: OK.

Q3: Are you saying that psychological theory has nothing to teach us about this? Because you’re talking around my question. You’re gorgeously articulate; you’re smarter than me. Does psychology have anything to teach us, or not? Yes or no? On this question.

JP: I don’t think it has anything to offer that I could teach you without… Hm, let me think.

Q3: So it’s just that it’s too complicated?

JP: No, no. It’s not that. Well, it is that, in part, because it’s not easy to articulate out the unerring principles by which you would make such a categorical judgement, because those are very situation-specific problems. It’s part of the problem of how to make a generic moral truth apply to a very individualistic situation. The problem in the sorts of situations you’re describing is, generally, the devil’s in the details, right? You have all these student, the ones you just laid out. They vary in their attitude towards their self-professed gender, from the ones who are grandstanding to some degree, let’s say, to the ones that are very serious. You have to make a judgement, in the moment, that is dependent on the variables that present themselves in a very complex way, in that situation.

I understand why you took the pathway that you took. It’s perfectly reasonable to do so. My point was that you don’t minimize all the errors by doing so. It’s fine. It’s still a fine way of approaching. My point was that, because of my psychological acumen, I would say, the experience that I’ve derived, is that I would be comfortable in making the judgement and taking the consequential risk. I’m not saying I’d be correct. That’s not the same thing at all. I’m willing to suffer the consequences of my error. It’s not the same thing as being right. And so, if I feel that a student is manipulating me, then I’m not going to go along with it. Now, I might be wrong about that and actually hurt someone, who’s genuinely asking for something that they need. But I’m also… what would you say… sensitive to the error of allowing manipulation to go unchecked. Aha! You’re back.

BW: No, John…

Q3: A question…

BW: And then there can be a two-hour podcast on your wonderful podcast, which everyone can listen to.

Q3: Everything you’re saying is very-well put, but it’s [inaudible] slippery, and I know you can do better. It’s too slippery for me.

BW: Invite him on. OK, hands… Here, in the orange-and-pink scarf.

Q4: Thank you both for this really interesting conversation, which is not like most of the conversations we’ve had here, at the Ideas Festival.

BW: This is my first one, so I have no idea.

Q4: So, Doctor Peterson, there are a million questions that I’d like to ask. I’m only going to ask one, obviously. I’m a social psychologist with a clinical background. The thing that, I think, I’d most like to hear about right now, at this moment, is the very noisy, small percentage of people who oppose you. Have you thought of something they might be right about, that they might actually a point about, that you hadn’t thought of, but you’ve started to think they might actually have a point about?

BW: Great question.

JP: I don’t know if I’ve started to think about the point that they have that I didn’t think about before. I mean, people have been characterizing me as right wing. I’m not right wing, so the characterization isn’t very helpful. One of the things I do all the time in my public lectures is make a case for the utility of the left. The case can be made quite rapidly: If you’re going to pursue things of value in a social environment, you’re going to produce a hierarchy. It’s unavoidable, because some people are better at whatever it is that you value. And so, when that lays itself out socially, it will produce a hierarchy. The hierarchy has a necessity, if you’re going to pursue the things of value. But it has a risk: the risk is, that will ossify and become corrupt. That’s risk number one. Risk number two is that, when you produce the hierarchy, you’re going to dispossess a number of people, because there will be lots of people in the hierarchy, who aren’t good at it, and they’ll be dispossessed. So you need a political voice for them. That’s the left. So I make that case over and over.

What the right does is say, "yeah, but we still need the hierarchy." It’s like, "yes, you still need the hierarchy." The reason we need the political dialog is because we need the hierarchy, and we can’t let it get out of control. The way to balance those two competing necessities isn’t by only having the hierarchy or by dissolving the hierarchy. You have to live with the tension, because the situation keeps shifting. So the way you live with the tension is by talking. You say, "well, there’s the current state. The hierarchy needs to be tweaked this much, because it’s getting too tyrannical, and it’s dispossessing too many people. We need to tweak it, so it’s not as corrupt, and so it’s a little bit more open. We have to talk about that all the time. It’s not the only thing the right and left do, because they also talk about the necessity of borders. That’s the other fundamental thing that they do. The dialog has to continue, so that we can have the hierarchies and utilize them as tools, without allowing them to descend into tyranny.

I made a case on the web. I did a talk at the University of British Columbia, "A Left-Wing Case for Free Speech"—as if that’s so difficult to make. I mean, that’s the sort of case that was made until, like, 2014, or something like that. So the left-leaning types have all sorts of things, that are correct, to say. One of the problems of the left—and this is another thing that I talk about all the time in my public lectures, by the way: we know how to put a box around the extremists on the right. Basically, we say, "oh, you’re making claims of ethnic or racial superiority: you’re not part of the conversation anymore." What do we do on the left? Nothing! That’s not good, because there’s an issue: "can the left go too far?" "Yes." "When?" "Oh, we don’t know." Well, that’s not a very good answer. Now, you could say, "well, then it’s up to the moderate leftists, to figure that out, so they can dissociate themselves from the radicals." And it is up to them, but that’s actually not a very good answer either, because it’s all of our problem. Centrists don’t know how to reliably identify the too-radical left. Right wingers don’t know how. And it’s partly because it’s actually, I think, more conceptually complex. With the radical right, you can kind of lay it down to one dimension: "oh, racial superiority. Nope: you’re out of the conversation."

BW: But that’s Milo, who you mentioned before.

JP: I didn’t say I was a fan of Milo.

BW: No, but you called him a prankster.

JP: Well, he is a prankster, mostly.

BW: Yeah, but he’s also a racist.

JP: Well, possibly. Yeah. I haven’t followed Milo that carefully, and it’s possible that he is. It’s hard to tell what Milo is, exactly. He’s a very complicated and contradictory person, destined to implode, which is exactly what happened. There’s just no way you can be that contradictory a person and manage it. It’s just not possible. He was just too many things happening at the same time for anyone to ever manage. But on the left… I don’t know what it is. I think the left becomes toxic—one of the things that makes the left unacceptable is demands for equality of outcome.

It’s like, "nope. You’ve crossed the line, man." That’s not an acceptable demand, and that’s increasingly a moderate leftist demand, as well. It might be more complex. It might that there’s four things that you have to demand, on the left, that all of a sudden makes what you’re doing unacceptable, and we don’t know what those four things are. So I actually think it’s a conceptual problem, as well as an ethical problem. We don’t know how to bind the necessary left, so that the radicals don’t dominate counterproductively. And if you don’t think that the radical leftists can dominate counterproductively, then, well, heaven help you.

BW: That, I agree with. But the idea that it’s so clear on the right is not clear to me. I mean, look at the Trump administration.

JP: Oh, I don’t think that it’s necessarily applied very clearly. But, at least conceptually, it’s more…

BW: But we can point it out.

JP: We can point it out better.

BW: That’s because of World War II?

JP: Yes. That helped quite a lot, actually. But the thing is that the communist catastrophes don’t seem to have made it any clearer on the left.

BW: Yes.

JP: That’s another thing that the universities have done that’s unacceptable, by the way—the intellectual class, by the way. It’s never come to terms properly with the fact that the intellectual class, as a whole, was supportive of the communist experiment, and it was an absolutely catastrophic failure on every measure of analysis. People say, "well, that wasn’t real communism." It’s like, "you really shouldn’t ever say that." This is what it means. It’s the most arrogant statement that a person can make. It means that, "had I been in the position of Stalin, with my proper conceptualization of the Marxist utopia, I would have ushered in the utopia." That’s what it means. It’s like, "no. First of all, if you actually were that good spirited—and you’re not, by the way—you would have been eliminated so fast after the revolution occurred that it would have, well, it would have killed you." That’s what happened: after the Russian Revolution, the small minority of people that were generally well meaning, they were dead, like, within two or three years. So that wasn’t real communism.

BW: I think I’m seeing zero, as in zero questions, zero time, zero something. One more question, really. OK. Yeah, I know. Several people do. Can we take a few, and he’ll answer them shortly? Maybe two more? Let’s go here, and the front row, right here. Yes, but make it very, very short.

Q5: Thank you for coming, and I’m honoured. It’s very important. Great mentor. Great help to me and a lot of people that I’ve been sharing your work with. I have two books here, and I would like you to sign them for them.

BW: OK, you could do that after, I’m sure. Yes.

Q6: Professor Peterson, this is akin to the question that the young woman over there asked. If you could get in a self-reflective mode, over the course of your life and career to date, what could you say honestly, to us, about where you felt you’ve been most wrong, and what provoked that?

JP: I’m not thinking about how I’ve been wronged.

Q6: How you’ve been wrong, like wrong in your thinking.

JP: Oh, incorrect. I was wrong about the Big Five personality theory for about five years. I know that’s not very interesting to any of you, but I didn’t like it at all. It was brute force statistically derived. It wasn’t theoretically interesting. I didn’t like it at all, but I was wrong about that, because the science was well done. What else have I been wrong about… Well, you asked for profound examples of being wrong. In my field, that’s actually a profound example, because that’s one of the major theories of the field. You’re thinking of more interesting examples…. What have I changed radically… Oh, when I was a kid, I was an avid socialist. I was wrong about that. But more specifically, I was wrong about that because I thought that there were questions I wanted to answer that that doctrine could answer. It wasn’t that it was socialism that didn’t make the answers emerge: it was that it was the wrong level of analysis. That was a major source of error.

It was, sort of, the source of error that the journalists that are going after me are making. They think everything is political. It’s like," no, it’s not. There’s lots of levels of analysis, and the political is one." I learned, eventually, that the political wasn’t the right level of analysis for the questions I was interested in addressing. That was a major error. It took me years to sort that out, and to figure out what the consequence was. I was wrong about the significance of religious ideas, because, when I was a kid—13, or so, and I was smart enough at that point to see the contradiction between the evolutionary account of the origin of human beings and, say, a scriptural account—I just dispensed with that in a, sort of, new atheist move. I threw the baby out with the bathwater, and I was really wrong about that—like, profoundly wrong about that. I’m sure I’m profoundly wrong about a bunch of other things, but I’ll figure out what some of those are as we go ahead. So that’s three things. Those are big things. If I thought more, I could come up with other examples. But those are pretty big things I was wrong about.

BW: Thank you all so much. Clearly, an hour and a half is not enough with you. But thank you so much for your time.

JP: Thank you very much.


Dr. Jordan Peterson: Well, I have a question. I’d like to know a little bit more about why you specifically chose the title "The Master and His Emissary".

Dr. Iain McGilchrist: It was an attempt to explain what I believed was the relationship between the two brain hemispheres. Like most other things in life, they’re unequal and asymmetrical. One of the brain hemispheres sees more than the other. That is the one that I’ve designated the "master", and is the right hemisphere.

JP: That’s a weird inversion, because people often think of the left hemisphere as the one that’s dominant.

IM: They do, they do. Traditionally, that’s been the case, but, as is becoming ever clearer, the right hemisphere—this has been a real steep learning curve for some people—is in many ways more reliable, sees more, understands more than the left hemisphere, which is like a high-functioning bureaucrat, in a way. The idea of the story was simply that certain matters needed to be delegated, not only because, as it were, the master couldn’t do everything—he needed an emissary to go abroad and do some of it—but also that he must not get involved with a certain point of view. Otherwise, he’d lose what it was that [inaudible]. What I’m really saying, there, is that there’s a good reason why, evolutionary speaking, the two brain hemispheres are separate.

JP: When you say "doesn’t get involved", what’s the advantage of that detachment from the involvement?

IM: Well, it’s that… Ramón y Cajal, who you know is a great histopathologist—one of his findings was that, in primates, there are more prohibitory neurons than in any other animals, and there are more in humans than in any other primate.

JP: And that’s speaking proportionally.

IM: Proportionally, and there are more kinds, as well. We think that about 25 per cent of the entire cortex is inhibitory, so it’s a very strong effect. The callosum seems to be very largely, in the end, inhibiting function in the other hemisphere. That is, I think, because, over time, the two hemispheres have had to specialize. There are reasons why, actually, it can’t be. I’m not going to go into it now, but I was talking just a few days ago at the evolutionary psychiatry meeting. But there are reasons why the corpus callosum has had to become more selective, and to inhibit quite a lot of what’s going on in the other hemisphere; because it enables the two to do distinct things. Of course, they have to work together, but, usually, good teamwork doesn’t mean everyone trying to do the same row. So differentiation is very important for two elements to work together. Inhibition is one way of doing that. Effectively, the two takes on the world, if you like, that the hemispheres have are not easily compatible; and we’re not aware of that, because at the level below consciousness there’s a meta-control center that is bringing them together. So in ordinary experience we don’t feel that we’re in two different worlds, but effectively we are. They have different qualities and different goals, different values, different takes on what is important in the world.

JP: I’ve developed a conceptual scheme for thinking about the relationship between the two hemispheres, and I’ve been curious about what you think about it, and how it might map onto, or not, your ideas. I’ve been really interested in the orienting reflex, discovered by Eugene Sokolov, I think, back in about 1962. He was a student of Luria's. The orienting reflex manifested when something, at least in their terminology, unpredictable happened. I’ve thought much more recently that it’s actually when something undesired happens, and the laboratory constraints obscured that, and that actually turned out to be important. I kind of put together the ideas of the orienting reflex with some of the things I learned from Jung’s observations on the function of art and dreams. So imagine that you have a conceptual scheme laid out, and we could say it’s linguistically mediated, it’s enforced on the world, and then there are exceptions to that conceptual scheme, and those are anomalies, things that are unexpected. The orienting reflex orients you towards those.

IM: Yes.

JP: So those are things that aren’t fitting properly in your conceptual scheme that you have to figure out. The first thing you do is act defensively, essentially, because it might be dangerous. And then your exploratory systems are active, and the exploratory systems, first of all, are enhanced attention, from an attentional perspective. But then—and this is where the art issue sort of creeps into it—the idea would be something like "the right hemisphere generates an imaginative landscape of possibility that could map that anomaly." So you can kind of experience that if it’s at night, you know?

IM: Yeah.

JP: Say you’re sitting alone at night. It’s two or three in the morning. You’re kind of tired. Maybe you’re in an unfamiliar place, and there’s a noise that happens that shouldn’t happen in another room. You can play with that. So, for example, if you open the door slightly and put your hand in to turn on the light, and you watch what happens, your mind will fill with imaginative representations of what might be in the room.

IM: Yes, yes.

JP: It’s like the landscape of anomaly will be populated with something like imaginative demons, and that’s a first-pass approximation. It seems to me that’s a right hemispheric function, and that, as you explore further, that imaginative domain, which circumscribes what might be, is constrained and constrained and constrained and constrained, until you get what it actually is, and that’s specialized and routinized. It’s something like that.

IM: Yes, yes.

JP: Does that seems like a reasonable—what do you think about that?

IM: I love that for a whole host of reasons. One is, you mentioned "defense", and one of the ideas behind my hypothesis is that the right hemisphere is on the lookout for predators, whereas the left hemisphere is looking for prey. This has been confirmed in many species of amphibians and mammals.

JP: I’d never heard that second part. When you’re in left hemispheric mode, you’re more in predator mode; and when you’re in right hemispheric mode, you’re more in prey mode.

IM: Of course, we are not lizards or toads or marmosets, or whatever. But in animals, generally speaking, this is the case. The left hemisphere’s the one that controls the grasping [inaudible], and exploring, which you mentioned, is more right hemisphere. When a frontal function is deficient, people often go into an automatic mode of the hand of that side. And the left hand, it’s usually exploratory motions. Meaningless ones, but trying to explore the environment. And with the right hand, it’s grasping pointlessly at things. They’re automatic things. With the left hand, the right hemisphere to explore. With the right hand, the left hemisphere to grasp. So when you said "exploratory", and you said "defensive", and you said, also, "opening up to possibilities"—these are all aspects of the way the right hemisphere… I often say the right hemisphere opens up to possibility, while the left hemisphere wants to close down to a certainty, and you need both of these.

JP: Right, right. It’s a chaos and order issue.

IM: Chaos and order. In your talk, you talked about chaos and order, but, if I may say so, you seem—and maybe you’d like to gloss that a little—to suggest that it would be good… We can’t get rid of chaos, but you seem to imply that it would be better if we could, whereas my view is that chaos and order are necessary to one another, and there is a proper harmony or balance.

JP: Yeah, well, OK. I think that’s as deep a question as you could possibly ask, I would say, in some sense.

IM: Good.

JP: I would say there’s a central theological issue there.

IM: Yes.

JP: The issue there is that, in Genesis, the proper environment of humanity is construed as a garden.

IM: Yes.

JP: I see that as an optimal balance of chaos and order. Nature flourishing, and it’s prolific and it’s chaotic. If you add harmony to that, you have a garden, so you live in a garden. You’re supposed to tend a garden. OK, so then a garden is created. It’s a walled space, because Eden is a walled space. It’s "paradeisos". It’s a walled garden.

IM: That’s it.

JP: The thing is, as soon as you make a wall, you try to keep outside out, but you can’t, because the boundaries between things are permeable. So, if you’re going to have reality and you’re going to have a bounded space, you’re going to have a snake in the garden. Then the question is, "what the hell should you do about that? Should you make the walls so high that no snake can possibly get in? or should you allow for the possibility of snakes, but make yourself strong enough so that you can contend with them?" I think there’s an answer, there, that goes deep to the question of, maybe, even why God allowed evil to exist in the world.

IM: I agree with you.

JP: It’s like, "well, do you make people safe or strong?" Strong is better, and safe might not be commensurate with Being. It might not be possible to exist and to be safe.

IM: Our existence is predicated on the fact that we die, so it’s never safe.

JP: Well, it’s certainly bounded, right? It’s inevitably wrapped up with that sort of finitude. There’s a lovely, lovely Jewish idea, an ancient idea. It’s one of the most profound ideas I’ve ever come across. It’s kind of a zen koan. It’s a question about the classic attributes of God: omniscient, omnipresent, and omnipotent. What does a being with those three attributes lack? The answer is "limitation," and the second answer is, "that’s the justification for being," that the unlimited lacks the limited.

IM: Exactly, exactly.

JP: And so the limited is us.

IM: For anything to come into existence, there needs to be an element of resistance, so things are never predicated on one pole of what is always a dipole. Everything always has that dipole structure.

JP: Yeah, it’s like a prerequisite for Being.

IM: It is, and it’s imaged in the yin-yang idea. But it seems to me very important, because, in our culture, we often seem to suppose that certain things are just good and other things are just bad, and it would be good if we could get rid of the bad ones. But, actually, by pursuing certain good things that are good within measure too far, they become bad, and so forth. But let’s go back to your anomaly thing, because Ramachandran calls the right hemisphere the "anomaly detector".

JP: Yes, yes.

IM: So I think that’s a very important point, because there are two ways you can react to an anomaly. One is to—and both have to be explored—try and prove that it’s not really an anomaly, and therefore you can carry on with things as normal.

JP: Yes. That’s what you hope will happen.

IM: That’s the typical left hemisphere approach. It doesn’t want anything to have to shift, and quite reasonably. You don’t want to be chaotically shifting, if you’re on to a good thing.

JP: Yeah. It’s too stressful.

IM: Exactly.

JP: It takes too much work.

IM: And you might actually be mistaken.

JP: Yes, that too.

IM: In a way, it’s perfectly correct to be wary, but it’s not correct to be so wary that you blot out anomalies, and there’s lots of evidence of that. The left hemisphere simply blocks out everything that doesn’t fit with its take. It doesn’t see it, actually, at all. So there’s a hugely important element in the right hemisphere going, "hang on: there may be another way of thinking that will accommodate this better." And, actually, good science needs to be skeptical about anomalies, otherwise there would be chaos, but it also needs to be able to shift when an anomaly is large enough, or there are quite a lot of them and they don’t really fit really well.

JP: Exactly, yes. There’s another observation that Jung made. I loved this observation. He was trying to account for radical personality transformation. His idea was this, and I think it’s commensurate with the ideas of inhibition between the two hemispheres. So let’s imagine the left is habitually inhibiting the function of the right, to keep fear under control. It does that in all sorts of ways. Imagine the right is reacting to anomalies, and it’s aggregating them. The left can’t deal with them, so the right is aggregating anomalies. Maybe that’s starting to manifest itself in nightmarish dreams, for example. These anomalies are piling up. It’s indicating that you’re on shifting sand. So then, imagine that the right hemisphere aggregates anomalies, and then it starts to detect patterns in the anomalies. Now it starts to generate what you might consider a counterhypothesis to the left’s hypothesis.

IM: Exactly.

JP: If that counterhypothesis gets to the point where the total sum, in some sense, of the anomalies, plus the already mapped territory, can be mapped by that new pattern, then at some point it will shift.

IM: Yes.

JP: And the person will kick into a new personality configuration. It’s like a Jean Piagetian stage transition, except more dramatic.

IM: It is, and what a Piagetian stage transition is also like—and it subsumes both—is Hegelian [inaudible], the idea that a thing is opposed by something else, but when there is a synthesis, it’s not that one of them is annihilated: they’re both transformed and taken up into the whole, which embraces what before looked like in opposition.

JP: OK, here’s a question for you. When I read Thomas Kuhn, I was reading Piaget at the same time—and I knew that Piaget was aware of Kuhn’s work, by the way. The problem I had with Kuhn and the interpreters of Kuhn—who interpret Kuhn as a moral relativist, in some sense—is that they don’t seem to get the idea of increased generalized ability of "plan". So let’s say I have a theory, and a bunch of anomalies accrue, and I have to wipe out the theory. So then I wipe out the theory, and I incorporated the anomalies, and now I have another theory. That’s a descent into chaos. That’s my estimation. That’s the oldest stories. So the anomaly disruption is the mythological descent into chaos, and then you reconfigure the theory with the chaos, and you come up with a better theory.

IM: Yes, the resurrection.

JP: "Why is it better?" Well, the answer is, "it accounts for everything that the previous theory accounted for, plus the anomalies."

IM: Exactly.

JP: So there’s progress.

IM: Always.

JP: Yes, exactly. But Kuhn is often read as stating there is no progress. There’s incommensurate paradigms, and you have to just shift between them. But there isn’t cumulative knowledge, in some sense.

IM: I think one thing that we would both probably agree about is that we don’t buy the story that because nothing can be demonstrated definitely, utterly, to be the case, there is no truth. I mean, I think we both believe that there are truths, things that are truer than other things.

JP: We certainly act that way.

IM: We couldn’t even talk, could we, if we… And even to say that there are no truths is itself a truth statement, which is that it’s truer than the statement "there are truths". So everyone automatically has truths, whether they know it or not.

JP: It’s because—well, you said why. It’s not only that you can’t talk—you can’t even see.

IM: No.

JP: Because you wouldn’t know how to point your eyes.

IM: You wouldn’t know how to discriminate what’s coming into your brain at all. So it’s inevitable. I think we would agree about that. But I think there may be a slight point of difference between us in that I’m very willing to embrace the idea of uncertainty, and I may be wrong—perhaps you could expand on that—but sometimes you come across as a man who has certainties that…

JP: Well, it’s a peculiar kind of certainty. I’m certain that standing on the border of order and chaos is a good idea.

IM: Good.

JP: That’s a weird certainty, eh?

IM: Exactly, exactly. You need to be in the sort of slightly unstable position.

JP: Yeah. You have to be… what would you say… encountering as much uncertainty as you can voluntarily tolerate.

IM: Yes.

JP: I think that’s equivalent of Vygotsky's "zone of proximal development". So when we talked a little bit earlier about an instinct for meaning, I think what meaning is, is the elaborated form of the orienting reflex. But what meaning does, it’s function, it’s biological function—which I think is more real, in some sense, than any other biological function—is to tell you when you’re in the place where you’ve balanced the stability, let’s say, of your left hemisphere systems with the exploratory capacity of your right, so that not only are you master of your domain, but you’re expanding that domain simultaneously.

IM: Yes, yes.

JP: I think that when you’re there, it’s kind of a metaphysical place, in some sense. You’re imbued with a sense of meaning and purpose. That’s an indication that you’ve actually optimized your neurological function.

IM: Yes, and perhaps we could gloss the idea of "purpose", because I think people get very confused, I think, about the idea of "purpose", particularly whether there’s a problem that’s suggesting there is a purpose. I believe there is a purpose, or there are purposes to the cosmos, not just to my life—suggest that it’s all been predetermined by God, but this is misunderstanding the nature of time, that there are static slices, and God is there, and he’s sorted it all out, the whole thing’s just unfolding, as Bergson says, "like a lady’s fan being unfurled." It’s extremely boring, and an entirely static and uncreative universe. But, actually, something is at stake. Things are unfolding. They have overall a direction. But exactly what that direction is, isn’t known.

JP: That’s what it looks like to me.

IM: It’s a fool who says anything positive about the nature of God, but I’m not convinced that God is omniscient and omnipotent, either. I think God is in the process, is becoming. God is not only just becoming, but is becoming, if you see what I mean.

JP: Yeah, so Being and Becoming.

IM: More becoming.

JP: More becoming.

IM: Becoming is the important thing.

JP: Why do you think that? It’s also a strange segue. I mean, I’m not criticizing you, but I’m curious. What drove you to that conclusion?

IM: An awful lot of things, really. I think that everything is a process. In fact, I’m writing a book called "There are No Things".

JP: Oh, what are there instead?

IM: There are processes.

JP: Yes.

IM: And there are patterns.

JP: Patterns. That’s why music is so powerful.

IM: Music is one of the most mysterious and wonderful things in the universe, and I don’t think it is at all foolish of people to have thought that the planetary motions were in some way like a kind of music.

JP: No, it’s not at all. It’s a great insight.

IM: I think it is a very important insight.

JP: Well, music… I’ve said this in public lectures, that music is the most representative of the arts.

IM: It is.

JP: Because the world is made out of patterns, and music describes how those patterns should be arranged.

IM: You’re using "representative" in a very different way.

JP: I know, I know, but it depends on what you mean by "representative". It’s representing the ultimate reality of the cosmos. That’s pretty representative.

IM: Well, I would like to say "presentative", in that it’s not "representing" anything. When we’re in the presence of music, something is coming into Being, which is at the core of the whole cosmic process.

JP: I think that’s why people love music.

IM: They do, and there’s hardly any originality in the idea, because lots of physicists say this, but the movement of atoms and movement of planets, and so forth, are more like a dance, or more like music, than they are like things bumping into one another.

JP: Right, right. I thought of "things" as patterns that people have made into tools.

IM: I agree with you, and tools are what the left hemisphere is always looking for. It’s always looking for something to grasp. It rarifies processes that… It’s all a matter of time. Every single thing, including the mountain behind my house, which is billions of years old—if you were able to take, as it were, a series of time lapse camera—you’d see the thing morphing and changing and flowing. As Eric [inaudible] once said, "everything flows. It’s just over the time period that you consider it."

JP: It’s a question of tempo.

IM: It’s a question of the tempo. So taking time out of things and considering them in the abstract, deracinated from context, particularly from the flow and the context of the time, changes them into something else. I think that what, in brief, Plato has done and what a lot of the history of more recent Christianity has done is to thing-ify God and heaven—perfect states that are unaltered, and so on. I think it is an evermore wonderfully self-exploring, self-actualizing process that requires a degree of opposition, as a stream, in order to have the movement and the ideas and patterns in it, it has to be constrained.

JP: I’ve had intimations like that about death. It’s hard to describe these experiences, but when I’ve contemplated death deeply, it’s struck me as a fundamental repair mechanism against the part of the mechanism by which new things that are better are brought into Being.

IM: Absolutely.

JP: You see that in your own Being, because, of course, without death, you couldn’t live, because you’re dying. The things about you that aren’t right, even at a physiological level, are dying all the time. Unfortunately, you also completely die. But more cosmically speaking, it does seem to me that death is… I don’t know, man. I’ve had intuitions or intimations that death is the friend of Being. That’s… It’s hard to get my head around that.

IM: I completely agree with you, and that’s been said by many wiser people than myself—maybe even than yourself.

JP: I would suspect so. Hopefully so.

IM: I think that’s right, that death is predicated on life, but also that it shouldn’t be seen as something that’s a negative. It’s a necessary stage in Being becoming what it is. Since everything is ramified, since nothing is just isolated, you and I may look [inaudible] or feel [inaudible], but as you often eloquently say, we all have a history and in time we come from a place, but also as a culture we have history. We can’t detach ourselves from it. We’re expressions of it. But we’re also inevitable dependent, as all organism are, on the environment: where I end and where the "environment" begins. I don’t like the word "environment", so "nature".

JP: No, it’s a mythological concept.

IM: It suggests something that’s always being born, whereas "environment" suggests something around me, from which I’m separate.

JP: And even opposed to.

IM: Yes, yes. So I would see us as like an eddy in a stream, or like a wave in the sea. It’s never separate.

JP: Schrödinger talked about life as such things.

IM: The coming together of physics with a process philosophy are very strong.

JP: So when does that book come out?

IM: When I finish writing it.

JP: Oh, hah.

IM: And I’m very worried that it’s getting bigger, and is… In all this time I’m writing it, I’m seeing more and more things that I really must get to know more about it, and it’s an ever-receding…

JP: Well, that’s the danger of a book that aims at something fundamental, because you never hit the proper boundaries.

IM: That’s it. I need that wall.

JP: I also had imaginative experiences, I would say, that, when I was trying to understand, say, the necessity of evil—because that’s also a fundamental theological conundrum and a metaphysical conundrum: "why is it that Being is consisted such that evil is allowed to exist," right? It’s Ivan Karamazov’s critique of Alyosha’s Christianity, essentially. "What kind of God would allow for this sort of thing?"

IM: It’s an ancient question.

JP: Yeah, it’s an ancient question. I’ve thought about the adversarial aspect of that, which is that you need a challenge. You’re not forced to bring forth what you could bring forth without a challenge, and the greater the thing you’re supposed to bring forth, the greater the challenge has to be, so you need an adversary. Something like that. But I also thought, "it’s possible that Being requires limitation." You might say optimal Being requires free choice. I know I’m going through a lot things quickly. Free choice requires the real distinction between good and evil.

IM: It does.

JP: Without that, you don’t have choice. Also, maybe it’s possible to set up a world where evil is a possibility, but where it isn’t something that has to be manifest: it’s an option open to you, and a real option, and it has to be, and the challenge that was presented to you, but it’s something that you can not move towards, if you so desire. That seems to be something like the ethical requirement. That’s the fundamental ethical requirement, to avoid evil. That doesn’t mean it shouldn’t exist. That’s not the same issue.

IM: No, it isn’t. I wonder, one could recast it as the need for otherness. God needs something other; and that other, if it’s not going to be just part of God, has got to be free. Otherwise, there will be no creation. The nature that there is something other than God… It may, in the end, come from and come back to that God, or that divine essence, or that whatever.

JP: That’s something I can’t figure out, either. In the Christian idea, there’s the end of time, where the evil is separated from God forever. I think about that as a metaphysical… Well, you might think, if it’s a form of… Imagine it’s a form of perfection, a form of striving for perfection. You fragment yourself; you challenge yourself; you throw what’s not worthy into the fire everlasting. Something like that. So what you end up with retained is much better than what you started with, through the trials. Something like that.

IM: That sounds a bit like the dialectical process that we’ve been talking about.

JP: Right.

IM: You have eluded to a couple of very good Jewish myths, and there’s one in the Lurian Kabbalah about the creation. I don’t know if you know it, but it’s absolutely riveting to me. The idea is that the primary being—Ein Sof, the ground of all Being—needs something other to come into being: the creation. That creation, what does that Ein Sof do? This is his first act. Is it to stretch out a hand and make something? Not a bit. The first act is to withdraw, to create a place in which there can be something other than the Ein Sof. And so the first stage is called Tzimtzum. It sounds negative, as so many creative things do. It withdraws, and, in that creative space, there are vessels. A spark falls off of Ein Sof and falls into the vessels, and they all shatter. That’s called "the shattering of the vessels".

JP: Yes. I came across that in Jung.

IM: Right, yes. And then there is the third stage, "repair", in which what has just been fragmented is restored into something greater. And so this process carries on. In my terms, that’s very much like what happens with the hemispheres. The right hemisphere is the one that’s first accepting. It’s sort of actively receptive, if you can put it that way, to whatever is new. You were talking about Elkhonon Goldberg’s, and so on. And then, whatever that is, is then sort of processed by the left hemisphere at the next stage into categories—"this is that"—and try to understand it. Of course, whatever it is, is much bigger than any of the categories. So they all break down, and it gets restored in the right hemisphere into a new whole: the tikkun; the repair.

JP: That’s "tikkun", right? T-i-k-k-u-n.

IM: T-i-k-k-u-n. I think the kind of easy way of thinking about it is learning a piece of music. You’re first sort of attracted to it as a whole. You then realize you need to practice that piece at bar 28, and you realize that at bar 64 there’s a return to the dominant, or something. And then, actually, when you go on stage, you’ve got to forget all about that. But it’s not that that work is lost. It’s just that it’s no longer present.

JP: Right.



Dr. Jordan Peterson: Well, the most significant event was the fallout from a series of videos that I made. In late September of 2016, I made one video critiquing the policy framework within which federal bill C-16 was likely to be interpreted, taking particular issue with its provisions for compelled speech in relationship to pronouns, but more fundamentally, I would say, by criticizing the theoretical framework regarding human identity that had been instantiated into the law. The legal claim—and this is mostly stemming from legislation and policies that were developed in Ontario, but will have a significant influence on the federal level—insisting that biological sex, gender identity, gender expression, and sexual proclivity varied independently, which is more extreme than a radical social constructionist view; because the radical social constructionist view is that all of those tiers, including to some degree biological sex, even, are socioculturally determined.

JP: Of course, human beings are highly cultural animals, so there is pronounced sociocultural determination of virtually everything that we do, but that doesn’t mean that those levels of identity vary independently, which is the claim that’s being made. In fact, they’re very, very, very, very tightly correlated. It would exceed .95. They are virtually perfectly correlated. And so I believe that that’s an unwarranted intrusion of a certain kind of postmodern ideology, fundamentally, with its roots in a kind of Marxist identity politics. I think that it was completely inappropriate for that to be transformed into legislation. Anyways, there’s been all sorts of consequences of that. My household was an absolute media tornado. I guess it still is, really. For months after that, there were journalists lining up outside the house.

JL: Outside your own home?

JP: Oh, yeah.

JL: Oh, I had no idea.

JP: There were journalists in the house all the time, and one after the other.

JL: You don’t have to answer on camera if you don’t feel comfortable, but what was this like for your family? It was all very unexpected, from my understanding.

JP: Oh, it was completely unexpected. The reason I made the videos was because I had something to say. I was trying to—sometimes, I can’t sleep at night, because I’m thinking about something. Usually what I’ll do is go write it down. I have some writing to do, so I get up, and I go write down what I’m thinking, and that usually does the trick. But because I had been playing with YouTube, I thought, "well, I’ll try making a YouTube video, and telling people what I’m thinking about, and see if that performs the same function as writing." To me, the function of writing—well, it’s twofold. One is, conceivably, to communicate with people. Although, the fundamental purpose for me is to clarify my thoughts, so that I know—because if something is disturbing you, what that means is that it needs to be articulated. It’s the emergence of unexplored territory: something that disturbs you.

That’s the right way to think about it: it’s unmapped territory that’s manifesting itself. It’s like a vista of threat and possibility, and you need to articulate a path through it, and so that’s what I was doing. I was thinking, "well, this is bothering me, and this seems to be why, and here’s what I think is going on." So I made the videos, and, in some sense, I didn’t think anything more of it. What happened, I think—and I’ve been thinking about this in retrospect. It’s never obvious what’s going on, because things go on at multiple levels. I think they go on at a theological level. That’s the most fundamental level of, let’s call it, epistemological reality. It might even be ontological reality, but it’s certainly epistemological reality.

JL: If I can interject for a moment, what do you mean by theological in this sense? What does it mean to you?

JP: Well, it’s been my experience as a clinician that, the more serious the events that you’re discussing with people, the more the language shifts towards what you might describe as the religious. So, for example, post-traumatic stress disorder—that’s a good example—or cases of serious child abuse or truly reprehensible interactions between people. They’re best conceptualized with regards to a dialog about the nature of good and evil. In fact, with post-traumatic stress disorder, that’s actually necessary, I believe. And I should say, in keeping with that, I’ve had a number of war vets come up to me after my recent talks and tell me that watching my lectures has cured their post-traumatic stress disorder, because I provided—and I’ve provided my clients with the same thing. Most people who develop PTSD and other catastrophic psychological reactions—not so much when something terrible happens to them, but when something terrible happens to them because of someone malevolent. Sometimes that malevolent person can be themselves. Soldiers, for example, often develop PTSD if they observe themselves doing something on the battlefield they did not believe was within their realm of action. It’s as if the archetypal adversary leapt forward out of their soul and seized them, and acted for them on the battlefield. And then they’re shattered by that; they can’t believe they were capable of that. That destroys their sense of what it means to be human, and what being human means.

That’s more likely to happen to people who are somewhat naive, I would say—certainly that’s the case with the PTSD literature. So, to treat someone in a situation like that, you have to help them develop a philosophy, I would say, but probably a theology of good and evil, because you have to investigate the structure of the motivation for malevolence. You can’t do that outside the confines of religious language, partly because—this is a difficult thing to understand, and I think you have to have had contact with true evil in order to understand it: the fundamental motivation for the most malevolent actions is actually revenge against God. That’s even the case if the people who are malevolent are atheist. It doesn’t matter. In some sense, it doesn’t even matter if God exists. The people who are acting malevolently act as if there is a sapient creator, who is responsible for this horrible mess, against whom revenge must be promulgated. The earliest literary example of that is in the Cain and Abel story, because Cain kills Abel—who is also his ideal—clearly to spite God, because his sacrifices were rejected. It’s an unbelievably profound story, because that is exactly how people react when their sacrifices are rejected by God, for all intents and purposes. They become bitter and resentful, and look for revenge. The more vengeful they are, the more they enter the territory of absolute good and evil, rather than proximal good and evil.

It’s very helpful for people who have post-traumatic stress disorder to start to understand that sort of thing, because otherwise, they can’t find a way out. So things have these levels of existence, theological at the bottom. That’s where the battle for good and evil takes place, and where the power of the truthful word is most evident. Above that is philosophical, and, perhaps, above that is political, economical and sociological, and then familial, and then individual. Complicated things manifest themselves at all those level simultaneously, and you have to pick a level of analysis that's most suitable to formulate the problem.

The proximal cause of my video production was the promotion of legislation to make compelled speech of a certain form mandatory. That produces two responses. One was a proximal response that the transgender activist community—a community which, by my estimation, in no way speaks legitimately for the transgender community. Many transgender people have told me precisely that, a substantial number of them, in well-written and well-formulated letters to me. I’ve received at least—I think it’s up to about 35 letters like that, now. They went after me, along with the coterie of expected suspects: the LGBT activists and the radical leftists and so forth. They called me a transphobe and a racist, which is really something—I think it was because I made some disparaging comments about the leaders of Black Lives Matter in Toronto, who, believe me, deserve all the disparaging comments you could heap on them. That's a completely independent of the potential validity of the Black Lives Matters movement. I have said virtually nothing about that. So then the argument started, really, I suppose, in the media and online: Well, what the hell was going on? Was I just this bigoted, transphobic, fossil-dinosaur? or was something else happening?

I believe, when I made the videos, that the legislation itself and the policies were signifying a crisis, a disjunction in Western society, of which the gender pronoun argument was only a tiny tendril. The fact that the videos received so much attention—and the aftermath of it, also—continues to reverberate with no decrease whatsoever in intensity, I would say… And this is like, what, six months later, seven months later? It’s a long time. It’s no 15 minutes. It’s a long time. It’s because I put my finger on a nerve. I’ve been thinking about why that was, because many people have decried political correctness, but they did it in generic ways. So here’s a strange sequence of thoughts: There’s this idea in Christianity that the word—that’s associated with consciousness, I would say—is the mechanism by which chaotic potential is transformed into habitable order, and also the mechanism by which order that has become too rigid is dissolved and reconstituted. That’s the basic element of the hero myth. The word, the logos, is a universally distributed eternal phenomena. But, in the Christian context, it’s also been given a localization, so it’s as if this universal principle—well, that's the word made flesh—was also instantiated in the local. There’s a deep idea, there, which is that the universal lacks something. What it lacks is specificity. So in order to make the universal even more universal, you make it specific.

JL: In what sense do you think this is—I find this fascinating, as a cognitive anthropologist, because it seems to speak to the level of cognitive processing that we find most workable as human beings. We’ve evolved to live in small social units and be attentive to minds that are out there. We have a consciousness of other consciousness, essentially—a heightened one. It seems to be that, in order to make things tangible for people, it has to be brought down to the level of a regular human cognitive…

JP: Exactly, exactly. Well, the linguists have noticed that, as well. They’ve identified—I don’t remember what they call them, but the natural level of semantic formulation, so words like "cat", "dog". They’re often short words, and they seem to signify the typical, automatic, untrained level of perception. So things manifest themselves to us at a certain level of resolution, and that’s the level of resolution at which conscious reality exists.

JL: Right.

JP: And there is something about that. The movement, the encapsulation of the universal into the particular, is what produces reality. The idea’s also expressed in the image of the genie, which is, of course, "genius". The genie is tremendous power encapsulated in a tiny space. The Christian idea of that—because one of the things that Christians were trying to figure out was, "how was the entire majesty of God able to instantiated itself into a human frame?" They had this idea they called "kenosis", which was the emptying of God. I think a modern person would think about that as the difference between a high resolution photo and a low resolution photo. So human beings are low resolution representations of God. That’s one way of thinking about it. There’s a profound idea lurking behind that, that we are not capable of formulating properly. It has something to do with the nature of consciousness, which is something we do not understand in the least. So, anyways, I think that what happened in my case, with the videos, was that I took this general problem, which is this philosophical and theological schism that’s developed in Western culture, that’s really destabilizing it in many ways.

The New York Times had an op-ed yesterday about how the West has lost faith in its central mission. That was the New York Times, you know? But what I did was take that general problem and make it specific, because what I said was, "well, here’s a law. It’s a little law. It doesn’t seem to effect many people, but it has an implication, and I’m not going to do it." And so it made—every global thing manifests itself in tiny, real places. People have asked me, "well, why did you pick that hill to die on?" Well, you have to pick a hill to die on. That’s why—because reality manifests itself in the particulars. So, anyways… You asked about my family. Well, the most stressful period, I would say, was the first two months, because, as a unit, we’ve had some media experience. Not a tremendous amount, but enough so that we were reasonably familiar with it. But this was a clamorous onslaught, and, at the same time, the university, in its wisdom, decided to send me, first, one letter, telling me to stop doing what I was doing, which was actually, perversely, helpful; because I had made the claim, while making the video, that making the video was probably illegal under the pending legislation.

Of course, people instantly accused me of overreacting—and then the university helpfully delivered me a letter, certainly informed by legal advice, stating that what I had feared about what I was doing was actually the case: that I was violating the university’s principles of inclusion and diversity and also, likely, violating the provincial guidelines. I thought, "well, thank you very much. You proved my point." They also said that they’d been receiving many letters, from people claiming that I had transformed the campus into an unsafe space, without mentioning the fact that they were receiving hundreds and then thousands of letters and signatures supporting me, which I found… Once I got the letter, I mentioned it to the university administrators, and said, "you should take this letter back and rewrite it, so that you take both sides of the argument into the account. Present both sides, and then say that you’ve decided that you mean to discipline me. But don’t omit half the story." No. There was no movement on that.

JL: That’s really interesting. If I can just pause the conversation there. This may be a tangent, this may be the next avenue of discussion, but what do you think it is on campuses—my understanding is that it’s even worse in the States than it is here in Canada, because of just the profit model of the university. Why do you think it is that some administrations seem to have been—if not possessed by, in your terminology, the ideology of the radical left or some aspects of the radical left—pushed more aggressively and, essentially, give way to those kinds of ideas, as opposed to other ideas. Is that part of that crisis of Western civilization that you were mentioning, that you feel we may be experiencing now? Is there something more substantial underlying why it is that administrations seem willing to go in that direction?

JP: Well, I think there are profound causes, and they do have to do with a crisis in our belief system—the sort of crisis that Nietzsche and Dostoevsky both predicted. That is a crisis in the faith in logos, and logos is the spirit that, you could say, imbues matter with life. That’s one way of thinking about it.

JL: For viewers who haven’t seen some of your previous material, let’s instantiate that for a moment. The concept of logos… How would the everyday person experience that in their day-to-day life? and how is that a focus of the crisis?

JP: You could think about it as the power of speech to transform reality. But even more importantly, more fundamentally, it’s the power of truthful speech to transform reality in a positive direction. We have this magical ability to change the future, and we do that through action, obviously. But action is oriented by thought, and thought is mediated by dialog. And so it’s speech, in particular, that’s of critical importance to this logos process. The logos is symbolically represented in the figure of Christ, who’s the word that was there at the beginning of time. So that’s a very complicated topic, but what it essentially means is that the West has formulated a symbolic representation of the ideal human being, and that ideal human being is the person who speaks the truth to change the world.

JL: I’m really curious about this. In your opinion, is this an especially Western concept? or is it just simply a matter of you having studied mainly Western mythology?

JP: No, I think it’s—I mean, there is emphasis in other belief systems. I think it’s more explicit in Christianity. I would say Christianity has done two things: it’s developed the most explicit doctrine of good versus evil, and it’s developed the most explicit and articulated doctrine of the logos. And so I would say, in many traditions, it’s implicit. It’s implicit in hero mythology, for example. I think what happens is that, if you aggregate enough hero myths and extract out the central theme, you end up with the logos. It’s the thing that’s common to all heroes. That’s a good way of thinking about it.

JL: This reminds me of—I don’t know if you’re familiar with the story of René Girard.

JP: Many people have been talking to me about René Girard.

JL: OK, just to challenge the ideas, here. So in our previous interview, I sometimes played devil’s advocate, and viewers, apparently, appreciated that tact. So when I say these things…

JP: That’s fine.

JL: Just take that with a grain of salt. So René Girard has a fascinating theory about the role of the scapegoat, which we won’t get into in depth here. But, coincidentally, in scare quotes, he winds up at a state where the answer to all his problems is Catholicism. He has this very roundabout and really intriguing theory about the nature of the role of envy and human society, and how the resolution of that creates bonds. But then, somehow, he decides that Catholicism, the particular religion that he was born into, is the solution. So in what sense… If you were to look at this self-critically, do you think this may be an instance of the same thing? in terms of what’s available to you, as a Western researcher, is the Western mythology. So, of course, that’s salient, and you’re able to make meaning out of that. But is it really any more or less profound in terms of its exploration of these ideas as, let’s say, Buddhist mythology or Islamic Sufi mythology? How would you answer that question?

JP: Well, I thought—again, it’s a matter of its articulation and dissemination into society, as a whole. So you imagine that these ideas are implicit. There’s an idea in Christianity, for example, that Christ is implicit in the Old Testament, which actually happens to be true—depending, of course, on what you mean by "true".

JL: In the sense of the messianic figure?

JP: Yeah, well, there’s this dawning awareness that, out of a plethora of heroes, the ultimate hero will emerge. Think about this psychologically. Just think about it psychologically. Imagine that what human beings are trying to do is abstract out the ultimate patterns for modes of Being. So what they do is they look for admirable people, and then they make a story about an amalgam of admirable people—that would be a hero—and then the heroes’ stories get amalgamated, so you get a meta-hero. Christ is a meta-hero. This is completely independent of any historical reality. That’s a whole different issue. And I’m not denying any historical reality. That’s a different issue.

The Western imagination has been at work for a very long time, constructing up a meta-hero—and also his adversary—and clarifying the nature of those. That has been done in a sufficiently delineated way, so that it’s produced a major impact on the manner in which our societies are constructed. The cornerstone of our society is respect for logos, and that’s instantiated in the doctrine of respect for free speech. It’s also instantiated in the doctrine that every individual has transcendent value, which I do believe is something that the West has developed to a far greater degree than any other culture that currently exists and probably ever existed. It’s just such an unlikely concept. In the West, even if you’re a murderer—even if people know you're a murderer—you still have intrinsic value. You have to be treated as if you have a spark of divinity within you.

JL: Would you say that this was the case even during, let’s say, the Middle Ages? And I know—in terms of my meagre understanding of medieval historiography—that its previous characterization as the Dark Ages is actually quite unfounded. But could you not argue that what you’re describing is actually a product—and maybe they’re related—of what arose out of particular sociopolitical processes that actually distance society from religion itself? They may or may not have been a product of that religious heritage, but in the height of the West or Christendom’s possession by Christianity in an ideological sense, as an all-encompassing explanation of the universe, witches were burned, people’s thumbs were cut off for challenging non-heliocentric positions. So how do you reconcile that historical trend, I suppose, away from religion and towards the sorts of respect for the individual that you’re describing?

JP: Well, when you asked that question, I had a vision. The vision was of a plane of barren earth with a gigantic crystalline structure underneath, forcing itself upward and breaking up the dirt. That’s exactly how I would answer that question: there’s this great idea attempting to manifest itself. It manifested itself, for example, in the decimation of slavery. There was an idea, and the idea was, "all men are created equal." That’s the idea. That idea is rooted in a much deeper idea, which is that there’s a spark of divinity in everyone, and that’s this logos capacity that enables people to name things and give form to the world, and that we’re not to violate that. You could say, "well, that emerged tremendously slowly," but it didn’t emerge slowly at all, man. The idea’s only, in its thoroughly formulated sense, about 2,000 years old. It emerged with incredible rapidity and demolished everything in its path, essentially.

Now, the people who like to trace the development of the Western mind back to the Enlightenment and stop there would say that it was actually the Enlightenment, and that that ran counter to the overwhelmingly oppressive Christian dogma that was standing in its way. Of course, there’s a certain truth to that, in that religious ideas, when formulated, can become restricted and dogmatic. There’s a spirit and a dogma that are always in conflict, and both are necessary, because the dogma provides structure and the spirit provides transformation. But my reading of—see, I think I take a much longer time view than the typical Western Enlightenment philosopher, who tends to think—like Charles Taylor, when he went back to look at the sources of modern self, basically went back 500 years. But I think in evolutionary terms; that’s a scratch on the surface. What we’re talking about, here, is something that’s indescribably deeper than merely what happened in the Enlightenment. I just see that, in some sense, as a sideshow of this crystalline process that’s emerging.

Nietzsche said that Christianity developed the sense of truth to such a degree that it died at the hands of its own construction. I think that’s brilliant. I think it’s absolutely the case. And so you can see the Enlightenment as part of that: the spirit of truth was highly developed, and that led people to start to criticize the very structure that had given rise to that desire for truth. And some of it’s also philosophical confusion, in my estimation. It’s like, once the rationalists and the empiricists got going, we started to formulate a very powerful doctrine of the objective world. That doctrine appeared to stand in opposition to the doctrine that was put forth by the Christian church—the mythological doctrine, let's say—if you assume that the mythological doctrine was a variant of that kind of empirical truth, which it wasn’t. It was something completely different than that.

JL: Right, and this is a really important point, because I think some people construe—I don’t want to say misconstrue, because it could be correct—that your description of what, let’s say, early modern or early humans understood their religious mythology to represent was, in fact, material reality. If I understand correctly, you’ve been arguing that they didn’t see it that way.

JP: The concept of "material reality" is a post-Enlightenment concept. I mean, if you look, for example, at how the alchemists described things prior to the emergence of the material world, they discuss the nature of the essence of the lemon. Well, a lemon is solar in essence. It partakes of the sun. Well, it needs the sun. It’s yellow, like the sun. It has the same stuff as the sun. The sun is golden. The sun is mercurial. The sun is illuminating. It has all sorts of attributes that we would consider spiritual. There was no distinction between the spiritual and the material.

JL: Right, but if there’s no distinction… It’s not that I… I mean, humans live in… We operate on a material basis, right? If there’s no distinction, is it not, in some sense, sort of a morass of confusion? and it’s that what we would consider spiritual as opposed to material was equally material…

JP: It’s more low resolution than confused. It’s a morass in some sense, in that—you can see a cell through a 10x microscope. It would have to be a fairly big cell. But anyways, you look at a cell through a 10x microscope: Well, now you can tell that the thing is composed of cells. Well, it’s still unclear, right? because the cell that you see is a low resolution cell. And then you zoom in and, "wow! This thing is made out of all these other things!" Then you zoom in more; it’s like, "wow! There’s a bunch more things there!" So part of the progress of human knowledge is the differentiation of the map. Now, you can get quite a long ways with an undifferentiated map. In fact, often an undifferentiated map is actually more useful, because it obscures useless detail.

So we’ve always been making maps of the world. You might say that we were making maps of the objective world, even when we didn’t know it. I would say, "no, we weren’t. I don’t believe that. We were making maps of Being, and that’s not the same thing." Imagine that you exist within a sacred landscape. OK, just for the sake of argument, well, how could a modern person conceive of that? Well, that’s easy: leave home for a while and then come back. Let’s say it’s your parents’ home and you’ve been gone for 15 years, and you come back. Everything in the house is imbued with magical significance. You might say, "well, that’s not inherent to the objects." It’s like, "yeah, sure—depending on how you define the objects." It’s completely inherent to the objects as they manifest themselves in your realm of perception, and you can dissociate the object itself from, let’s call it, the subjective overlay. But that’s not such an easy thing to do, and it’s not so self-evident, and it's not even obvious that what you’re doing when you do that is coming up with a more accurate picture of reality. The picture of reality that represents the item—let’s call it an item of sentimental or sacred importance. How do you know that importance isn’t the most important part of that item? That’s how you act. You won’t throw it away. "Well, why? It’s just a material entity." It’s like, "no, it’s not. It’s an element of Being, and that’s a different thing."

What people prior to the dawn of the materialist age, let’s say, were doing was producing maps of Being. That meant that things had historical significance. The mountain where your grandfather was buried is not the same mountain as another mountain. You might say, "yes, they are. They’re made out of the same clay and silica, and all of that." It’s like, "yeah, man—you’re missing the point." Now, a Westerner would say, "OK"—well, probably not, but a Westerner might object, "yes, but it’s extraordinarily useful to differentiate, and to act as if there’s an objective reality and a subjective reality, because it opens up all sorts of new avenues of pursuit." It’s like, "yes, that’s why we’re technological wizards, but we’ve lost something." What we’ve lost is our capacity to understand the reality of that overlay that we scraped off in order to produce objective reality.

JL: That’s a fascinating point. In what sense do you think that the persistence of religion—and not only in the symbolic, mythological sense that you’ve, it seems, made significant, resurrected, articulated to a wider audience, not only in that form but in the fundamentalist form—in the ISIS manifestation, let’s say, or in the far-right evangelical Christian movement in the States. How much of that do you think is a response to what it is that you’re saying: the fact that we lost certain…

JP: Oh, definitely it’s a response. This is something Nietzsche and Dostoevsky delineated with exceptional clarity: Western people had a hole torn in their soul. Nature abhors a vacuum. Something will rush in to replace it. Now you might ask, "well, why is that?" People like Sam Harris and Dawkins, for example, would think about it as a regression to a form of barbarism, but I think they violate their own principles, because they’re not taking the past seriously enough. This is particularly the case with Dawkins, who I think is actually starting to recognize this. If you take an evolutionary perspective on the development of belief, for example, there’s all sorts of things you discover, quite rapidly, that indicate that the manner in which belief structures are structures is something that evolved, and it evolved for functional reasons. Let me step back. From the perspective of the materialist, there is nothing more real than the atom, let’s say. From the perspective of a philosopher of Being, alternatively, there is nothing more real than suffering. You develop a different metaphysics, starting from those two different perspectives.

JL: What do you mean by "Being", in this sense? Putting myself in the shoes of one of the people you just described a second ago—to them, I think, all of a sudden, when you shift to philosophy of Being, it’s like, "OK, this could mean anything." Let’s try to nail that down. How would you articulate that to people for whom it doesn’t resonate immediately?

JP: Yes, well, of course you’d ask me that, because it’s a very complicated problem. Being is the realm in which suffering is real. Now, people act as if their pain is real.

JL: Why suffering specifically?

JP: Because you can’t argue with it.

JL: It’s the least deniable aspect of subjective experience.

JP: That’s it. Descartes’ great investigation into doubt led him to the conclusion that "I think, therefore I am." I don’t think by "think" he meant "think" the way we think. He meant more like, "the fact that I’m consciously aware is something that I cannot deny." That’s good. That’s fine. More power to Descartes for taking it to that extreme, and then producing what he produced out of that. But for me, when I investigated the structure of doubt, the conclusion that I drew was that there’s nothing more real than suffering. I would say you can tell what people experience as real and believe, let’s say, because their actions indicate that. People’s actions indicate that they believe in their own pain. That’s undeniable. You can’t argue yourself out of it. It transcends rationality, and so it’s real. And then, of course, it’s an axiomatic tenant of religious systems, generally speaking, that life is suffering, which is a restatement of exactly the same thing. And so Being is the domain in which pain announces itself as real. That’s not the material world. It’s not the material world. Pain is not a material phenomena. You can say, "well, it’s associated with material phenomena." It’s like, "well, yes." I would like to point out that that is hardly a brilliant observation. Everything is associated with the material world, because here we are in this world. So it’s a qualia, let’s say, if you want to think about it from a philosophical perspective.

JL: So by "pain", here—because I immediately leaped to the devil’s advocate position: well, yes, but pain is certainly a neurological process that can be treated with certain medications, and those have metabolic and chemical interactions that can actually limit pain or decrease pain. It’s treatable, in some sense. But by "pain", I believe what you mean is the experience of suffering generally. It’s unavoidable. You can tinker at the edges with medication or whatnot…

JP: Well, and quite nicely—and thank God for that.

JL: Exactly.

JP: You can tinker with it in all sorts of ways, which is exactly what we’re doing all the time. People say they’re striving for happiness. Actually, if you look at the empirical investigations into that, that’s wrong. When people talk about happiness, that isn’t what they mean. Happiness is extroversion, and, in its extreme, it’s like mania. It’s enthusiasm and joy, and it’s impulsive and expressive. That isn’t what people want. What they want is the cessation of negative emotion. So, actually, the scales that measure wellbeing, for example, technically—which is something Sam Harris is very concerned about—measure the same thing that neuroticism measures: sensitively to anxiety and emotional pain. People want very little of that, and then they say they’re happy because they're not differentiating. There’s the positive emotion end of being happy and there’s the not-suffering end of being happy, and what people mean when they say that they want to be happy is that they don’t want to be suffering. That’s what they mean.

JL: Do you think there’s an aspect of our current civilization or society, whether it’s the West or, at this point, just globally, where we have elevated a confused notion of the former with the latter? Because those are undifferentiated in our minds… we use this word "happy" or "happiness"… What pops into my mind are people’s Instagram accounts, Facebook, and other social media things, where people are trying to show everyone else how joyous and enthusiastic and wonderful their life is, because this seems to be our new ideal, in a society that lacks any other ideal.

JP: And, as Solzhenitsyn said, the philosophy that life is for happiness is destroyed the second the jackboots kick down your door at three in the morning. It can’t withstand tragedy, and that’s the critical issue, because life is tragedy. So you need a philosophy that can withstand tragedy. That’s what everyone needs; that’s what everyone wants. I would say that the philosophy that can withstand the ultimate tragedy of Being is as close to the ultimate truth as we can strive for, and that’s what religious systems are attempting to delineate. So, for example, in Christianity, there’s an idea that people are Fallen, and they’ve fallen into the terrible realm of history and self-consciousness, with its knowledge of suffering and finitude and its necessity for work. If you know that there’s you, and you know that you can suffer—because you are limited—and that you can die, then you are cursed with work, because even if you’re OK right now, you’re not like a lion who’s going to go to sleep and be happy, or like the zebra beside it, who won’t run away when the lion is sleeping. We know about the future, so we’re cursed to work and make sacrifices constantly. That’s our destiny, let’s say.

JL: In your estimation, is that a function of our… I assume what was an evolutionary process, from which we arrived at consciousness of time, future…

JP: We began to see the future. I think it was, a large part, a consequence of the development of our hyper-alert visual systems.

JL: This ties back to questions we received from previous viewers: in the sense that you are articulating—and some people would construe it as defending—the validity of the Christian position, per se… It’s not in a literal sense that the, let’s say, people who are conflating the material and the spiritual may be assuming. But it’s in the sense that it reflects something that we have evolved with us and we have begun to experience, and the religious symbology is how we make sense of that properly.

JP: Definitely, definitely. That’s why it’s mostly encapsulated in story and image. The reason for that is it’s too complicated for us to articulate. So it’s bottom-up development. The iconography of Christianity is an attempt to express something that we’re not yet smart enough to understand.

JL: This is a fascinating concept. Again, coming from a cognitive anthropological position, this is like, "yes, obviously." But I think, for many people, the idea that religious systems, belief systems in general, and, very probably, a lot of what we’re living out in our day-to-day life now, in 2017, is the outgrowth of something that we aren’t fully conscious of, that we can’t yet articulate, but is nonetheless a fundamental nature of our experience.

JP: Let me give you an example. A while back I was in New York—and, unfortunately, I don’t remember in which museum. But in this room in this museum, there was a spectacular collection of mid- to late Renaissance art. Staggering room. The value of the paintings in that room… They’re priceless. So there was billions of dollars worth of art in that room, and then there were people from all the world looking at it. So one of the pieces was of the Assumption of Mary. Beautiful. Not in that iconic manner that was characteristic of medieval art, that’s very abstract; but the forms are personified, so that Mary and Christ, in these sorts of representations, are identifiable individual human beings. There were a lot of people standing in front of that. I thought, "well, let’s be a cultural anthropologist about this. That museum is on some of the most expensive real estate in the world. There’s a tremendous amount of time and effort spent on producing the museum and fortifying it and guarding it. And then, people from all over the world make pilgrimages to stand in front of it—and, what they are looking at, they do not understand. So what the hell are they doing there? Why are they looking at those pictures?" Well, the answer is, "the pictures speak to their soul, but not in the language that they understand." But that’s ok, because we don’t understand ourselves. That’s obvious. We’re more than we can understand, by a tremendous margin. We’re trying to understand ourselves, and the artists and the mystics are at the vanguard of the development of that understanding, and they come up with ideas that are clearer than mere feelings, but are not yet clear. Imagine that there’s a…

JL: Is this analogous to the dream?

JP: It’s analogous to the dream. It’s the cultural dream. The dream is the vanguard of idea. There’s the body, and the dream emerges from the body. And then, the idea emerges from the dream. The social body is the body politic: it’s the communal body that’s extended over millennia—far longer than that. It extended forever, and the dream is the mythology that emerges from that, and the idea is our attempt to articulate that mythology.

JL: Would it be fair to say that some of the—not to get you off track, but this just popped into my head—frustration that you and other people who are interested in the same material as you feel in respect to, let’s say, the new atheist movement is that there’s a failure to realize that what they’re critiquing is precisely the equivalent of the dream? that there’s value in not-yet-precisely articulated experience of being human?

JP: They’re also not taking their evolutionary argument seriously. These ideas are old, like really, really, old. They disappear back into the far reaches of time. I mean, if you look at Frans de Waal’s work, for example, on dominance hierarchies in chimpanzees, there’s this old idea that the dominant chimp—because chimps are quite patriarchal, as opposed to bonobos, but we won’t bother with that for the time being. Chimps are quite patriarchal, and you might think, "well, the biggest, meanest, ugliest chimp wins. He’s the king chimp. He’s the one that gets to father all the baby chimps." Yes and no. Yes because sometimes it is the tyrant that rules the troop, but the problem with the tyrant is that two semi-tyrants can rip him into shreds, and they do, and with incredible brutality, and it disturbs the entire troop, when that happens. They’ll tear off his genitals with their teeth. They’ll rip off his skin. Chimpanzees are super strong. They’re about six times as strong as the most well-conditioned man. They can break 300-pound test steel cable with their bare hands. They are super strong, and they have absolutely no restraint whatsoever on their aggression, except the reactions of their conspecifics. So don’t mess with chimpanzees.

Brute rule is unstable among chimpanzees. What’s more stable? Well, the more stable rulers are—they pay attention to the females; they facilitate social interactions; they reciprocate; they have friends and allies; they maintain their friendships and their formations of alliances. And so, their rule stabilizes, and it’s because they're acting out what you might describe as the beginnings of an archetypal pattern. They’re acting as culture heroes for the chimps. That means that they have to be acting in a manner that’s commensurate with the interest of the group, as well as acting in a manner that’s commensurate with their own interest. The chimps are starting to act that out. The wolves act that out. The rats act it out. Like, when two rats engage in rough-and-tumble play, two juvenile rats—which they will work to do—if one rat is bigger than the other by about 10 per cent, that gives him the kind of weight advantage that makes him able to pin the other rat in the wrestling match pretty much about 100 per cent of the time. But if you pair those rats repeatedly, if the big rat doesn’t let the little rat win, at least about 30 per cent of the time, the little rat will stop asking him to play.

There’s a morality that emerges out of the necessity of social interaction. OK, so let’s say a morality emerges out of the necessity of social interaction. OK, that’s not a particularly contentious statement. But let’s say that’s been true for hundreds of millions of years, ever since the dominance hierarchy emerged. That’s about 350 million years ago. There’s ways of comporting yourself within the dominance hierarchy that allow for your survival and the possibility of your victory. OK, so that’s the beginnings of morality. Because the dominance hierarchy is so ancient, it actually acts as a selection mechanism. You see that in human beings. You see that in all mammals. The females use the dominance hierarchy—not in every mammalian species, but in most—to peel off the top. The successful climbers are the ones that leave the most offspring. So we’ve been shaped immensely by the necessity of acting morally within the social space. And so there’s an optimal manner of interacting with a dominance hierarchy, and then that becomes the environment, that selection mechanism. And then, the organisms are selected by that. That morality becomes structurally part of us, as well. Then there’s this concordance between our felt sense of moral obligation and the demands of the social world, and that’s real. It’s as real as anything, especially if you’re a Darwinian, because what’s most real from the Darwinian perspective is that which selections. That is what’s most real. That is the definition of real. It’s not the material world. It’s not. It’s that which selects, and that’s far broader than the mere material world.

JL: This is a meta-process, you’re saying, that is so fundamental to shaping what we view as material reality—and it’s more real than, let’s say, an atom, in the sense that gravity is more real than…

JP: Well, it’s real in that it accounts for emergent properties. It’s not a simple thing to reduce, well, consciousness, to its material substrate. But complex forms of social interactions aren’t easily reduced in a causal manner to the material substrate. I mean, we can’t draw causal links. We just don’t have that level of sophistication, and perhaps never will. So the reality of the processes that make up social interactions among social animals can’t be reduced to the material substrate, but they’re real, and they’re so real that they select. So they’re real. This is the problem I have with the people who are simultaneously reductionist materialists and evolutionary biologists. It’s like, "sorry, guys: you don’t get to be both." That’s the argument I was trying to have with Sam Harris, which augured in very rapidly in the first discussion, and I thought proceeded adequately well in the second discussion. Sam thinks that you can get the facts to speak moral truths for themselves. He also has this theory that we should be attempting to maximize wellbeing. But I’m not going to deal with the second claim at all, because the devil’s in the details, there, with how you measure wellbeing. Our ability to measure wellbeing is catastrophically unsophisticated, to say the least. The wellbeing scales that we have are extroversion minus neuroticism. That’s a big problem for someone who wants to do scientific measurement: it’s like, "OK, we’re going to increase wellbeing." "Hey, no problem. How are you going to measure it? and whose wellbeing? mine? OK, mine now? mine next week? mine next month? mine in a year? how about 10 years? how about 50?"

JL: And who chooses how to measure it?

JP: Well, precisely—"and my wellbeing in relationship to my significant other? in relationship to my family? in relationship to the community? at all those levels of temporal distinction? You’re going to measure that, eh? Good luck. And don’t come and say, ‘we can maximize wellbeing and we can do it scientifically’ until you get your measurement devices in place, and they’re not in place. That’s a fatal flaw."

JL: I assume Sam would disagree with this. In some sense, is that not the fatal flaw of the history of Marxism in the 20th century?

JP: Sure. It’s utopianism: "we can define wellbeing, and then we can collectively work towards it." It’s like, "well, I’m afraid it’s just not that simple." "From each according to his ability, from each according to his need." Sounds great. Devil’s in the details—and, definitely, the devil was in the details of that. So who defines "need"? who defines "ability"? That’s a big problem. It’s a fatal problem—and, literally, it’s a fatal problem. So, anyways, I trace back the development of these religious ideas to their—you can trace them infinitely far back. The issue of hierarchy and hierarchical position is absolutely key. It’s key to evolutionary survival. It’s key to mate selection. It’s key to survival.

JL: On that note—another sidetrack, another potential interesting avenue—we had a very insightful question from a viewer, or statement from a viewer, I should say: that the centrality of the dominance hierarchy in your thinking or understanding of the evolutionary process—in what sense is that not just a re-articulation of the Marxist or postmodernist position that power is everything?

JP: Well, that assumes that the reason that you…

JL: Power relations, I should say.

JP: That assumes that you relate dominance hierarchy mastery to power. Well, you can do that, because you could define it that way: "power is what gets you up the dominance hierarchy." Well, first of all, we should make a couple of things clear: I use "dominance hierarchy" because that’s a shorthand. People understand what that means. It’s not clear that hierarchies are, in fact, dominance hierarchies. One of my insightful colleagues once told me that I shouldn’t use the words "dominance hierarchy", because Marxism is built into that conceptualization—that the reason hierarchies exist is because of power. I thought, "Jesus, that’s probably true." It was quite a devastating criticism, in some sense, because it could easily be that the reason that hierarchical structures were formulated as dominance hierarchies was because the biologists who were doing the investigations, and the people who were formulating the ideas, had already been saturated with a Marxist view of power relations. But the reason that I brought up de Waal…

JL: Marxist or colonialism.

JP: Sure, sure. Absolutely.

JL: I mean, a lot of the recent history of Western civilization has been one of dominance over what were perceived of as inferior cultures: The White Man’s Burden.

JP: There are a variety of things that contribute to success, let’s say, and one of them is force. We won’t talk about power, because "power"… Force: force is when I get you to do something you wouldn’t choose to do. You could say, "the person who’s best at doing that is the winner." I would say, "no, that’s wrong. That isn’t how the evidence stacks up." The problem with being the person who gets the other person to do something by force is you have to enforce it, and that’s costly, and you can be killed; you can be overthrown. Even the most effective tyrannies suffer during times of power transition. It’s unstable. That’s the problem: a hierarchy built on power is unstable. It isn’t operating as a consequence of the will of the masses.

Piaget, the developmental psychologist, thought about this in depth. He believed, from a biological perspective, that you could think about it as two importantly different categories of games. One is the set of games that I make you play, and then, the other is the category of games that you and I play voluntarily. And then you might say, "let’s have a competition between those two sets of games. We’ll orient both of them towards the production of a certain goal. Let’s say a stable civilized society, for the sake of argument—including one in which some people can be very, very wealthy and powerful, because, of course, that’s what the tyrant wants. We’re going to put them head-to-head." Piaget said, "look, the voluntary game society will win, because it doesn’t accrue enforcement costs." It’s brilliant. That was part of how he formulated the equilibrated state, as something like… You might describe it as a particularization of the kingdom of God. That’s one way of thinking about it. I think that’s fair, when talking about Piaget, because what motivated Piaget throughout his entire life—and people don’t know this about Piaget, generally speaking—was the reconciliation of science and religion. That’s what drove him.

JL: Most people—just for the audience that might not recognize this name—I’m making an assumption here, recognize him largely as a childhood developmental psychologist.

JP: Yes, which is not how he conceptualized himself. He thought that he was something like a developmental epistemologist.

JL: Can you refresh my mind and, perhaps, those of viewers as to what the equilibrated state meant in Piaget’s knowledge structure, and how that relates to what we were discussing?

JP: Sure: peekaboo with an infant. The infant can play peekaboo, and what happens when you play peekaboo with an infant is that, very rapidly, by gesturing, you and the infant settle on the rules of the game. What you want to do is engage the infant in play, because you find that intrinsically rewarding. So the infant will look at you, and then if you smile, he’ll smile, generally speaking. You can tell if the infant’s in a playful mood, and then you can hide your face, and you calibrate that so you don’t startle the infant. You want to put the infant on the border of order and chaos, because that’s where the fun is. And so you play with hiding and re-manifesting yourself, and it produces delight in the infant. So what you’ve done, there, is spontaneously organized a tiny societal microcosm.

That’s the sort of thing that Piaget was interested in: he was interested in how children organize games. The games are tiny societies: everyone agrees on the rules, and they play them out. They’re microcosms of society, and, as the children transform, the confines of the game expand until the game and the social world are indistinguishable. It’s like the life of a pro football player. Is that real life, or is that a game? Well, at some point, the game is life. Then the question is, "well, what should the game be?" Piaget’s answer was, "well, the game should be one that everyone agrees to play." There’s more to it than that, and some of my development of Piaget’s ideas is that there’s a bunch of rules of the games—and this is why the postmodernists, by the way, are wrong about the infinity of interpretations. They’re wrong. There is an infinity of potential interpretations, but there isn’t an infinity of viable interpretations, and that's the critical issue. So what constrains the range of interpretations? Well, let’s say there’s an infinite number of ways of construing the world. Well, there are, and that’s a game the postmodernists take: not only can you interpret texts in an infinite number of ways, but the world is a text, and it can be interpreted in an infinite number of ways, and so you can’t define any particular mode of interpretation as canonical. That’s the fundamental claim.

OK, let’s take that apart. Wrong. First of all, my interpretations have to keep me going—also shouldn’t result in an excess of agony, because those are games I’m not going to play. So if I extract out an interpretation like a hot stove is something upon which I can rest my hand, my agony will tell me that that’s a nonviable solution. It isn’t just agony: it’s the whole panoply of things that produce suffering: hunger, thirst, temperature regulation, the necessity of illumination, sexual desire—all these built-in biological modules that are part and parcel of our evolutionary history, which postmodernists are forced to deny, partly because it undermines their theory and partly because it interferes with their sociocultural determinism and their Marxism. But the biological evidence is quite clear. This is why our concordance with animals is so tight that you can use antidepressants on lobsters, and we diverged from lobsters about 300 million years ago: there’s conservation like you wouldn’t believe. So we’re made up of biological modules, and they have their own worldview. The hunger system has a worldview; the pain system has a worldview, and the pain system is a dominating system. You mess with that thing, it’ll flatten you.

JL: Is there not a tension here… I’m with you completely on this. I follow you because this is sort of my bread and butter as an academic. I hope the audience is able to keep up, as well, because it’s incredibly important, I think. But is there a tension in your mind between what you’re describing, the fact that we’re nested in a biological reality that inherently constrains our viable options for interpretation… Is there a tension between that and the notion of optimizing for Being, as opposed to material reality? Because, I think, when some people hear you talking about the realm of Being versus the realm of the material, they assume or conflate the realm of Being with what you’re describing the postmodernists to indulge in, in a sense of, "well, anything is open to the realm of imagination."

JP: Oh, no. Being is radically constrained. Radically. Let me outline the other constraints.

JL: If I understand correctly, this is precisely the difference between our versions of pragmatism and the postmodernist position, of which there has been significant confusion…

JP: Well, that’s because Harris had me talk about the person from whom…

JL: Rorty.

JP: Rorty. Rorty wasn’t part of my pragmatism. I made that clear. It’s the William James and C.S. Pierce version.

JL: But there’s a conflation, I think, in some people’s minds. So what you’re describing is precisely… You’re differentiating.

JP: Precisely. So, first, we’ll say that we’re subject to biological constraints. And then, we’re subject to temporal biological constraints, which is that not only are we hungry today, but we’re going to be hungry tomorrow, and we’re going to be hungry in a year. So the biological constraints are now and later. The solution has to solve both those sets of problems, but that’s only the beginning, because I have those problems, but I also have the problem that there you are, and you have those problems. And so then we either fight, which is a problem, or we mutually negotiate such that we generate a solution, such that you get to solve your problems at the same time that I get to solve my problems—or maybe we even do it better: you get to solve your problems in a manner that helps me solve my problems, and I do the same for you.

That’s not easy. That’s narrow, and you know that, because if you live with someone, you’re constantly arguing with them, and the argument is, "which interpretation will suffice?" Right. And so, no, there’s not an infinite number of interpretations. There’s hardly any. But then it isn’t just me and the person I live with: it’s me and the person I live with, and the family, and the family and the community, and the community and polity, and the economic system, and the biological system. All of that has to be stacked up, one on top of the other. So the game is played at every level, simultaneously, the same way. In my estimation, that’s what a symphony expresses. That’s what it’s telling you. It’s stacked the level of Being so that every level operates harmoniously with every other level. I would also say that, because we’re evolved for that, we can tell when it’s happening, and that’s what the sense of meaning is. The sense of meaning is our third eye, you could say. Your eyes blind you, because they only see what’s here right in front of you now. They blind you.

You have to use modes of perception that transcend mere vision in order to conceptualize Being properly. One of those modes is the sense of meaning and engagement. That involves extraordinarily ancient systems. For example, it’s produced in part by the dopaminergic systems, and they’re rooted in the hypothalamus, which is an extraordinarily old part of the brain, and a very, very—maybe the—most fundamental part of the brain. It’s the one where most of the biological subsystems have their rootings: the hunger systems, and the lust systems, and that sort of thing. And so the sense of meaning is extremely old—old, old, old. But it’s differentiated very finely in human beings. When you’re engaged meaningfully, then what that is, is an intimation that the levels of Being are lining up, at least to some degree. You’ll feel that. You’ll feel that as a sense that life is meaningful. That sense is the thing that enables you to overcome tragedy.

JL: Correct me if I’m wrong, but there can be a tension between what is meaningful for a given individual and what is meaningful on a societal level, or for the most number of individuals. I’m thinking of if there’s a death squad: what’s meaningful for a death squad is when he feels like he’s in completely control of his country, and then he experiences that subjective state of meaning that you’re describing…

JP: Yeah, but I don’t think that is what he experiences. I think he’s driven substantially by terror and malevolence, and that’s not the same thing. It’s not like those things aren’t motivating. I’m not saying that this sense of transcendent meaning is the only motivator. Clearly it’s not. There’s sub-motivational systems that can take control at any time. But I don’t believe that the sense of meaning that I’m describing is akin to what a tyrant feels when he’s tyrannizing. That’s more like jealous rage, or something like that—or resentment. Now, I would say there’s an exception to that, because one of the things we haven’t talked about is the necessity for truth. So let’s allow, for a moment, that the faculty that produces this sense of engagement has the qualities I attributed to it. But I would say that also only works properly under certain conditions, which is, if you are sick—physically, biological, neurological—then it’s certainly possible that that meaning system is going to go astray. It’s going to signify meaning where the alignment isn’t proper. Well, that could happen for any number of reasons. It seems to happen in schizophrenia, for example, at a very, very low level.

I would also say, you risk making that happen to you—which means you can no longer trust your deepest instinct—by lying to yourself. So that could be selective omission of information. That’s the most common form of lie: passive avoidance; willful blindness. That’s the most common form of deception, although, active deceit can also play a role. If you contaminate the structure of your Being with false information, with deceptive practices, and you wilfully blind yourself, then you’re going to be led astray by your sense of meaning. You’re going to pathologize it. Part of the issue, here, is that you don’t want to interfere with your ability to see, because you’ll wander off the road into the ditch. People think, "well, why should I tell the truth?" which is a great question, man. Every smart kid figures that out—the smarter the kid, the younger they figure that out: "well, if I can lie to get what I want, why shouldn’t I, given that I want to get what I want?" That’s a great question.

JL: OK, so here’s a followup, then. Why not engage in a series of white lies?

JP: First of all, sometimes, that’s the best you can do. You could say that, well, you’re morally impelled to come up with the best solution you can under the circumstances. What you want is a statement that serves all levels of Being simultaneously. But, sometimes, you don’t know how to do that. The example that springs to mind for me, always, is the classic kind of joke situation, where wife asks her husband, "does this dress make me look fat?" or "what do you think of this dress?" Maybe the answer is, "I hate that god damn dress," and maybe that’s the answer. But if the question is, "do I look fat in this dress?" maybe the answer is, "I don’t answer questions like that," right? That would be the truth in that situation, and that’s—or there would be the white lie, which is, "oh, you look beautiful." But I don’t believe… White lies are suboptimal solutions to a complex problem. So that’s all. They’re true at some levels of analysis, and they’re false at others.

JL: Are there cases where stating what appears to be the truth, to the best of your ability to articulate it, is inferior to a pragmatically functional white lie?

JP: I would say it depends on your motivations. I can use the truth to hurt you, but then I would say that what I’m doing is like a white lie. It’s like a black truth. Let’s call it that. It also doesn’t serve the ordered structure entirely, because it’s true on three levels of analysis—usually sub levels—and not true on a really profound level. So I can say, "well, I’m just telling you this for your own good, and I told you something true," but I picked a context or state of vulnerability that I know you’re in, in which delivery of that message has an undermining effect, and I know that. I can say, "well, it was true!" It’s like, "no. All things considered, it wasn’t true. Some things considered, it was true." And a white lie is the inverse of that. It’s like, "well, on some levels it’s true. It would be wrong of me to hurt your feelings over such a trivial issue. And so, in order not to violate that higher moral principle, I’m going to violate a subordinate moral principle."

JL: Right, and in your system of thought, that higher moral principle, that higher level, is still part and parcel—in fact, it’s, perhaps, the pinnacle of the notion of truth, whereas for someone… Again, just to make reference to a previous interview you had with Sam Harris, the conflation or the intentional combination of moral truth with factual truth is either bizarre or it just doesn’t occur to people.

JP: Right, but he wants to do that anyways; he just wants to do it in the reverse. I was making the case that, by necessity, factual truth is subordinate to moral truth. He was saying, "no, moral truth can be derived from factual truth." He doesn’t get out of the problem. The problem is the necessary coexistence of both forms of truth. He just inverts the causal order. The problem with Sam’s account is that—and this is the problem that Immanuel Kant identified so many years ago: "do the facts speak for themselves?" "No, they don’t, because facts say a number of different things." If there’s a field in front of you, it does not tell you which path to take through it. But it’s worse than that: there’s an unlimited number of facts, and the problem is, "how do you select them?" The answer to that is, "the facts themselves cannot tell you that," and that’s why you have an a priori interpretive structure, which is, of course, what Kant was insisting upon. Sam doesn’t take that into account, and that’s mind-boggling to me, because that a priori interpretive structure is the sum total of the effect of our evolutionary history. So what about that? Where does that play into the game? We’re so selective in our attention, it’s unbelievable. There’s been estimates that the bandwidth of our conscious attention is like four bits. We’re like pinpointing the world. Some of that’s conscious, because we can make decisions about what we look at, and a lot of it’s unconscious, because our attention is attracted by, directed by, these fundamental underlying biological subsystems. But we’re making intrinsic value judgements all the time that are not derived from the facts at hand. That’s a blank slate viewpoint. Harris can’t be a blank slate believer if he’s an evolutionary biologist, and the same goes for Dawkins.

JL: What you just said made me think of—in a previous interview, you had mentioned motivated action and motivated speech. I think, for people who are not necessarily familiar with or are more than happy to readily dismiss psychoanalytic approaches, it doesn’t make much sense. It’s an intellectual boogey man, in some sense. But I think, if I understand correctly, when you reference "motivated processes", you’re describing something similar to what you just described, in the sense that we have a whole series of sort of undeniable biological impulses that constrain our cognition, that constraint what we pay attention to and what motivates us. Even when we think on a conscious level that we’re doing something for one reason, we’re very good at creating rational explanations for behaviour that we’re actually engaging in for much deeper, impulsive reasons.

JP: Well, that’s part of the fact that we’re not transparent to ourselves. People like Gazzaniga have made the claim—and think Dennett has really been hitting this hard lately—that mostly what our conscious mind does is come up with post hoc rationalization for our behaviours. It’s like, just because something’s partly true some of the time doesn’t mean that it’s absolutely true all of the time. We are trying to understand ourselves continually, and sometimes we come up with partial accounts for why we did what we did. But consciousness is also the builder of our habits. Now, it’s not the only builder, but you consciously attend to some action in a new domain and practice it. The consciousness builds up those habitual structures, and then they run automatically. But that doesn’t mean that consciousness was irrelevant to their production. It was very relevant to their production. It’s not just a mere post hoc add on. It’s not that at all. Consciousness is what—you’re playing a sonata, and you make a mistake. You play it again, you make the same mistake. What do you do? You’re playing it automatically. You’ve built the habit with hours and hours of practice and conscious attention. You’ve rewired yourself, building automatic mechanisms. An automatic mechanism fails, so what do you do? You look more intently at the notes, then you slow down, and you restructure the habit, and then you speed up, you speed up, you speed up. Then you play the segment, then you play the segment again, and then maybe you go back to the beginning and zip through. Then you’ve restructured that automatic system.

Consciousness did that. It’s not just a post hoc rationalizer—although, it can be that—and it’s often not a rationalization, either: sometimes it’s an investigation into the actual causal structure. It’s like, "I did that. Why’d I do it? Well, sometimes I want to come up with a story that sounds good to other people," let’s say, which seems to be Gazzaniga's theory about why we consciously utter post hoc rationalizations to justify our behaviours to ourself. Jesus, that’s pretty cynical. Often, it’s a deep attempt to identify the likely causal contributors. You could say, "we just don’t have that capacity." It’s like, "yes, we do, because otherwise we would continually repeat the same mistakes." If we learn from our experience, what we do is reconstrue our maps of value, so that we don’t replicate the error in the future. And because we are capable of not replicating past errors, obviously we’re capable of consciously altering our pathway, and also of performing a pragmatically useful causal analysis of the cause of our error.

Now, if you do psychotherapy with people and they have a traumatic memory, it won’t go away. Well, what do you do with it? You go back into the memory, and you assess the sequence of events in detail until they have an account that is sufficiently plausible, so that they believe that, if the same circumstances arose in the future, they would no longer fall prey to that error. So, for example, if it’s a naive person who was manipulated badly by a potential romantic partner, then what you do is, you say, "what was it about your viewpoint that put you at risk?" That isn’t blaming the victim. It’s helping the victim not be a victim again. It’s like, "yeah, it was 95 per cent the other person’s fault—whatever. They're not in the room with you. All you can do is try not to fall into the same pit. That didn’t mean someone else didn’t dig the pit." "OK, I was too trusting." "So let's take that apart. What do you mean, ‘too trusting?’" "Well, I always assume the good in people." "Well, what about these instances of people acting in a bad way?" "Well, I don’t really understand that." See, they need to differentiate up their worldview, to take into account the existence of predatory people. They also, generally, have to differentiate their view of themselves, to stop thinking of themselves as nice and harmless, because it's the nice and harmless naive person that’s exploitable by the malevolent psychopath, and that’s not moral virtue. That’s just weakness. That’s all it is. It’s naivety. It’s the maintenance of a childlike view of the world, far past its expiry date.

So you go back and take that apart. You formulate a more differentiated and sophisticated view of the world. The person finds that plausible, then you have them practice it, so they can see that it has applicability in the real world. And then, the emotion from the traumatic memory will go away. What’s happening is the anxiety system is saying, "unexplored territory! Unexplored territory! Unexplored territory!" What that system wants is to know, A, that someone is trying to map that territory instead of just avoiding the problem, and B, that there is a plan. Now, it’s not cognitively sophisticated enough, in some way, to know if the plan works. It wants to know that someone’s in charge, and that it’s being taken care of. That’s what you do in psychotherapy. You say, "look, you can face this. Even though you think you can’t, you can. We’ll break it into pieces. I’ll discuss with you a plethora of potential solutions. We can do it slowly. You can bite off as much as you can chew and no more. And we’re going to come up with something that isn't a post hoc rationalization for your behaviour: it’s a set of new tools, so that when you see that hole in the road, you walk around it. First of all, you’ll see it. Second, you’ll walk around it." People are massively encouraged by that process. They’re not made less afraid. In fact, they might be made more afraid. But the fear is much more focused, and they know how to deal with it. It’s like, "I didn't think there were dangerous people in the world!" "Well, there are." "Oh, my God! The world’s much more dangerous!" It’s like, "yes, it is." "Well, what am I going to do about that?" "You’re going to get smarter and sharper, because that's the cure. It’s not, ’we’re going to make the world less dangerous.’ The world is plenty dangerous, but it turns out you're a lot more capable than you thought."

JL: So in what sense is this corrective mechanism that you’re describing, that is epitomized in this case in psychotherapy… In what sense is that only accomplishable within a social context, where you have feedback from other agents?

JP: Well, that’s a good question. First of all, I would say, to tie this back to our earlier conversation, that curative process is the action of the logos in dialog. That’s what it is. I would also say that the degree to which you can manifest the logos is going to be radically associated with your functionality in human hierarchies. It’s the primary determinant of that. It’s the essence of genuine charisma. Now, that can be parasitized upon. Hitler did that. That can be parasitized upon. But just because a mechanism has value doesn’t mean that it can’t be parasitized. That happens all the time. It happens constantly.

JL: The mechanism you’re referring to, here, as genuine charisma is a clear ability to be able to effectively navigate a hierarchy?

JP: Yes, yes—well, and the world. It’s like, the dominance hierarchy is kind of a mediator between you and the world. So when you’re negotiating the social world, you are simultaneously negotiating the actual world, unless the social world has become so corrupt that it no longer bears any relationship to the real world, in which case everyone is in serious, serious trouble.

JL: Yes, I can think of parts of the world where…

JP: Oh, yes. It happens quite frequently. That’s the emergence of the tyrannical and senile king. The society is no longer adapted to the real world. So then, if you adapt to the society… Well, it’s like you’re the captain of a sinking ship. You’re going to drown along with everyone else, so it’s not that great. It’s not that useful.

JL: We were talking about how someone who exhibits those qualities—those qualities can be used for good or evil, let’s say, but someone who exhibits those qualities…

JP: It’s the simulacrum of those qualities that’s used for evil.

JL: Right. And then, to relate this to whether people are able to gauge proper behaviour, meaningful behaviour, on their own… or is there a necessity for social…

JP: Yes, yes. Well, they can do it, to some degree, on their own, but that only works until they have a problem they can’t solve.

JL: Right. Is that not sort of an opening for self-deception?

JP: Of course. Of course it is, and self-deception in all sorts of ways: self-deception as a consequence of implicit biases, temperamental biases. Your capacity to think—let’s say that’s your self-reflective logos—is limited by your ability. So it’s limited by your motivations and their purity, let’s say. It’s limited by your knowledge. It’s limited by your localization in this particular period of time and place. And so it’s insufficient, and you can tell it’s insufficient because problems arise in your life that you can’t solve. Well, so then what you do is engage very frequently in joint problem solving. And then you might say, "well, what makes a person particularly, let’s say, powerful, influential, able to function well in the social hierarchy?" "That’s easy: they solve problems." That’s what they do. If you come to someone with a problem, and they say, "well, here’s how you deal with that," you’re pretty happy about that. You’ll come back and see them again. It doesn’t matter what the avenue is. That’s what a mechanic does: "This doesn’t work." "I’ll fix it." It’s like, "hey! Right on, man. I’m bringing my car back there." So we’re pretty good at evaluating whether or not a problem has been addressed, because the problem goes away, so then we’re happy about that, because we don’t want the problem.

JL: Then how do we account for all the various flavours of self-deception that we perceived, and the mystification of our own hidden motivations that we observe in ourselves, in some cases, and certainly in others? When you talk about… Not to pick on him unnecessarily, but just because it popped into my mind: you mentioned in a previous interview that the new atheists… it seems that a lot of that thinking is motivated, to a degree. But they certainly wouldn’t recognize it as motivated. They see it as rational.

JP: Well, it is rational. It’s just rationality that’s bounded to too great a degree, in my estimation. Some of the motivations are… They pick a hill to die on. That’s one way of looking at it. Dawkins' idea of meme is so close to the idea of archetype—in fact, the last time that Harris and Dawkins spoke, they actually made a joke about that. Dawkins said, "well, if I admitted that, then everything would just fall apart," and they both laughed and went on. It’s like, "yeah, guys, you got it, but you backed away." As soon as you get the idea of "meme", it’s like, "OK, are there functional memes and nonfunctional memes? and how functional is a functional meme? how about if it’s super functional?" Of course—what, a meme is just a parasite? It’s only a parasite? I don’t think so. Why would you make that presumption?

JL: It certainly seems possible that there are parasitic-like memes.

JP: There are. Absolutely. There’s no doubt about that. Ideologies are parasitical memes.

JL: There are multiple ways we can take this. The battery is running low, so I’m just going to switch that out.

JP: OK, I’m going to get a glass of water. What time is it?

JL: There are multiple ways we can take this discussion, because it’s so relevant to so much of what we experience, both on an individual and a societal level. But I think, to be timely and respectful of some of the questions that people posed in their responses, maybe we can relate what we were just discussing to two areas, in particular. One is the degree to which we should take our religious or mythological formulations—that are the product of dozens of years of evolution, both biological and cultural, seriously and or literally.

JP: Sure. You would ask that question.

JL: That ties back to the question, I think, of the white lie that we were discussing earlier: the white lie or the black truth, in the sense of, if something is pragmatically true but literally appears to be untrue, how does one reconcile that, if it’s serving the ultimate good?

JP: OK, let’s start with the first one. That question pushes me…

JL: Just for my own memory—and the second point I want to get to is the risk of ideological possession in today’s political climate, and what your own research and what we discussed brings to bear on how to avoid what seems to be an increasingly problematic issue at this particular point in Western history.

JP: OK, so the first one is with regards to the relationship between the metaphorical and the literal, let’s say.

JL: Yes. To concretize it, we’ve had questions from orthodox Christians who view you, for instance, as a defender of Christianity, because of what they’ve read online. And then they listen to what you say, and they’re like, "well, OK. So he’s on my side"—so to speak—"but does he really believe in the divinity of Christ? Does he believe in the transformation of bread into flesh, and these sorts of things?"

JP: Of course, that depends on what you mean by "believe" and what you mean by "divinity".

JL: And the third issue, just to go from there: and, if so—or if not—what, in Peterson’s estimation, is the role or importance of ritual and acting out certain religious…

JP: Good. We’ll start with that. People often ask me, "do you believe in God?" I don’t like that question. First of all, it’s an attempt to box me in, in a sense. The reason that it’s an attempt to box me in is because the question is asked so that I can be firmly placed on one side of a binary argument. The reason I don’t like to answer it is because, A, I don’t like to be boxed in, and B, because I don’t know what the person means by "believe" or "God", and they think they know. The probability that they construe "belief" and construe "God" the same way I do is virtually zero. So it’s a question that doesn’t work for me on multiple levels of analysis, but, strangely enough, just as we were talking, the answer to that question popped into my head: I act as if God exists.

Now, you can decide for yourself whether that means that I believe in him, so to speak, but I act as if he exists. That’s a good enough answer for that. Then, with regards to these other issues, the divinity of Christ, I would say the same problems with the question formulation obtain. What do you mean by "divine"? and what do you mean by "Christ"? These are very, very difficult questions. Now, for all intents and purposes, I believe the logos is divine. If by "divine" you mean of ultimate value, of ultimate transcendent value: yes, it’s divine. It’s associated with death and rebirth, clearly, because the logos dismantles you and rebuilds you. That’s what happens when you make an error.

When you make an error, some part of you has to go. That’s a sacrifice. You have to let it go. Sometimes it’s a big part of you. Sometimes it can be such a big part of you that you actually die, instead of dying and being reborn. "Is there something more than merely metaphorical about the idea of dying and being reborn?" "Yes, there is, because those are associated with physiological transformations." "What’s the ultimate extent of that?" That’s a good question. The question is, "what happens to the world around you, as you increasingly embody the logos?" The answer to that is, "we don’t know." We don’t know the ultimate level of this. Now, the hypothesis is—and it’s a hypothesis that extends, to some degree, to Buddha, as well. The hypothesis is that there has been one or two individuals who managed that, and that in their management of that, they transcended death itself. Well, then you might ask yourself, "what do you mean by ‘transcended death?’’" Well, in the case of Christ, let’s assume he was a historical figure for the time being—which, I think, is the simplest thing to assume.mI think there is sufficient evidence to conclude that. You could conclude otherwise, but, personally, I feel that there is sufficient evidence to conclude that. Is his resurrection real? Well, his spirit lives on. That’s certainly the case.

JL: In what sense do you mean "spirit"? Just to qualify that.

JP: Well, let’s imagine that a spirit is a pattern of Being. We know that patterns can be transmitted across multiple substrates, right? Vinyl, electronic, impulses, air, vibrations in your ear, neurological patterns, dance: it’s all the translation of what you might describe as a spirit. It’s that pattern. It’s independent of its material substrate. Well, Christ’s spirit lives on. It’s had a massive effect across time. Well, is that an answer to the question, "did his body resurrect?" I don’t know. I don’t know. The accounts aren’t clear, for one thing. What the accounts mean isn’t clear. I don’t know what happens to a person if they bring themselves completely into alignment. I’ve had intimations of what that might mean. We don’t understand the world very well. We don’t understand how the world could be mastered, if it was mastered completely. We don’t know how an individual might be able to manage that. We don’t know what transformations that might make possible.

I’m going to do a series on the Bible. That’s one of the things I want to investigate more thoroughly and formulate my thoughts about more thoroughly, because it is a crucial issue. A friend of mine said—and I wouldn’t describe him… He’s certainly not the sort of person that you would describe as a classic Catholic. He’s an extraordinarily well-educated individual. He’s come back to Christianity with the most vicious of internal battles. This is the same person who made the comments earlier about the dominance hierarchy, so he’s very insightful. He said, "it falls apart unless you believe in the divinity of Christ, and in the resurrection of Christ." He meant that in a very fundamental way. There’s a way in which that’s true, but I don’t know exactly what it means yet. The metaphorical element of that, to me, is quite clear: the death and rebirth idea? Yeah. You see that echoed all over. One of the most recent popular manifestations of that idea is in the Harry Potter series, because it’s full of deaths and rebirths of the central hero.

JL: Is it not a manifestation of hope, or something beyond the finality of which we’ve become inescapably conscious?

JP: Well, yes, and that’s the Freudian critique, right? He just thought of it as a wish fulfillment. Although, the problem with that theory is, well, people also generated up the idea of hell. You could say, "that’s a convenient place to put your enemies," and still put it in the wish fulfillment framework, but I think that’s absurdly cynical. People who believe in hell are terrified about hell for themselves, and, in my estimation, they should be, because I also believe in hell. Although, what that means, again, is subject to interpretation. Lots of people live in hell, and lots of people create it.

JL: But beyond the basic Freudian, snide interpretation, is it not a belief in the identification with something that transcends your limited existence?

JP: Yes, definitely. But it’s funny, too, because, in the more Christian formulations, there’s an insistence on the resurrection of the body, which I find extremely interesting. Even the more, say, sophisticated deist types are kind of willing to go along with the idea that there might be something eternal, transcendent about consciousness, or about the spirit or the soul. Something like that. But they’re certainly not willing to go beyond that. But there’s this very peculiar emphasis in Christianity on the resurrection of the body, which is a glorification of the body, which is quite interesting. It’s not something you want to dismiss so rapidly, because it is a glorification of the body and an indication of the necessity of the body, of that limitation.

JL: Could that not be an instance of what we were describing earlier, in terms of a specific instantiation of a general [inaudible] and it’s the instantiation itself that makes it real? The body is the most real thing that we experience…

JP: Well, yeah, and it’s real in part because it’s limited. It has limitations.

JL: So the focus on the mythological representation of the body as resurrected is saying, "this is more real. This is just as real as you can imagine."

JP: Yes, yes. It’s an elevation of the material, interestingly enough—not a denial of the material; an elevation of the material. It’s a very interesting idea. As I said, I want to explore that more, because I’m not fully comfortable with my ability to bridge the gap between the metaphorical and the real—although, I think that the way that I described it is as close as I can come right now. Magical things happen as the logos manifests itself. Now, that’s self-evidently true.

JL: And, when you say "magical", you mean "magical", for all intents and purposes, in terms of our perception as relatively naive human consciousness? or magical in like, you know, rabbits out of hats?

JP: Well, certainly the former, and God only knows about the latter. That takes us afield, into strange areas—Jung’s observations of synchronist events, for example. We don’t understand the world. I do think the world is more like a musical masterpiece than it is like anything else. Things are oddly connected. I know that sounds New Age-y, and it sounds metaphysical. I’m saying bluntly that this is speculative. I’m feeling out beyond the limits of my knowledge. But I’m not willing to dismiss the mysterious, because I’ve experienced the mysterious in a variety of different ways. It’s very mysterious. Very.

JL: From a cognitive perspective, is that not the most rational position to take, in any case? Because we know our cognition is inherently bounded by a whole range of constraints.

JP: Well, we certainly know we’re bounded by ignorance, and there’s far more going on than we know or can know. The problem is that, when you start to speculate, it’s a projection of your imagination. Now, that’s not necessarily a bad thing, because knowledge advances through projection of imagination. The problem is you can see yourself reflected back at you, and then it’s self-fulfilling, and so you can see what you want to see.

JL: That’s right, and what you’re describing reminds me both of what I’ve read, and, through my experience, understood in terms of the Buddhist tradition, as well as the Islamic Sufi tradition. They use almost identical metaphors, as we were just using to describe this experience—in the sense that, to experience the mysterious in its most pristine form, you precisely have to rid yourself of your self, to avoid those projections. You want a clean mirror, so to speak—is the symbology that’s often used in Islamic mysticism—so that it best reflects what’s actually mysterious, and you’re not merely projecting your vain imagination.

JP: That would also be akin to the idea that I presented earlier, that you want to speak and live the truth, so that you don’t muddy your vision, because then you’re blind, and you will walk into things. That’s why you tell the truth. The problem is, if you lie, you believe the lies. The problem with not telling the truth is you falsify your map, and you will wander off the pathway. How could it possibly be any other way?

JL: That’s also what precisely—according to the scripture—Buddha said. He said, "false beliefs are the problem. You have to rid yourself of these false beliefs." If you follow that all the way through, then you have the soteriological goal, which may or may not be an achievable reality.

JP: Right, right. It’s an ever-receding horizon.

JL: That’s right, but it’s nonetheless… That’s what we’re aiming for.

JP: Yeah, and it seems like the right aim.

JL: In Islamic Sufi mysticism, you can speculate as to the aetiology of Islamic Sufi mysticism and its relationship to other forms of mysticism that predate Islam. The goals are precisely the same. The metaphors that are used are "polishing the mirror", so you best reflect what is divine, and, in this sense, "divine" in terms of the logos, the ultimate truth. You’re not muddying it with your own…

JP: Lies.

JL: Precisely—or inaccuracies. There seems to be something fundamental that…

JP: Yeah, well, the fundamental issue is that you should get your map right, right? The problem is that, even if you try, it isn’t clear how good a map you can make. But that’s OK, because, try as hard as you can; you’ll find out. But it’s certainly the case—and maybe it’ll be a good enough map. Maybe it’ll even be an accurate map. You don’t know. Independent of your inevitable ignorance, you can certainly stop being wilfully ignorant, and see what happens. My sense, too, is that you don’t get to complain about the structure of the world until you stop falsifying your relationship with it, because you don’t know to what degree the pathology of your Being is associated with the falsification.

JL: Because it’s inherently bound up with your subjective experience. We could even subtract "subjective": it’s essentially bound up with one’s experience.

JP: Right, right—because what you’re doing is you’re twisting and bending your value structure, and that’s what determines the focus of your perception, and your emotional responses. All of that. So get your aim right. "Well, what’s the aim?" "Truth," and I think it has to be nested in love. "Love" is something like the notion that, despite its suffering, Being is good, and you should serve Being. That’s a decision you have to make, because you can easily say, "well, Being is corrupt and evil," and there’s plenty of evidence for that. So it’s a decision: "Being is good. I’m going to serve good Being, and to do so means to tell the truth," and then you play that out, and then the magic happens. And that, I believe to be the case. I do believe, in some sense, that’s self-evident.

JL: But what you described to me… You’re most familiar with the Christian theological tradition. I’m more familiar with Islamic Sufi and Buddhist theological tradition. What you just described is incredible, and it, from my understanding of Sufism and other mystical traditions—in the sense that the twin principles that the polishing of one’s mirror, so to speak, are the principle of truth, ultimate truth, which is synonymous in the Arabic and the Persian languages with "God". It’s one and the same—and "love". And not "love" in the sense of "I love my puppy," but "love" in an all-consuming sense; one that motivates your entire being.

JP: Right, and the way that I interpret that—and I try to do this in my therapeutic practice. I try to do this all the time: I want the best for what wants the best in you. I’m that part’s friend. When my clients come in, it’s like—and this is different than the unconditional positive regard that the Rogerians talked about, which, I think, was an oversimplification. I don’t have unconditional positive regard. I am not on the side of you that’s aiming at your defeat. I’m not at all on that side. I’m on the side of you that’s struggling towards the light, and I’m on the side of that part of me—at least, I’m trying to be on the side of that; and that’s the definition of "love", I believe, because what it means is… Well, I said it: "I truly want the best for what wants the best in you."

People love that. They love that, man. If you’re interacting with people, with that ethos in mind, they find that… Well, I think that’s partly why people are responding so positively to my videos, because that ethos informs the videos. I’m trying to figure out what’s the best for us—really, the best. Not the best for me, although, that’s part of it, because here I am, and I’m in the game, too. But I’m so greedy, let’s say, I don’t just want the best for me. That’s not enough for me. I’m too greedy for that. Maybe I’m too selfish for that. I want the best for me in a way that’s the best for everyone else, too, because that’s even better. That’s another interesting thing about being bounded by death, is that you have nothing to lose. You might as well aim for the highest goal, because what have you got to lose that you aren’t already going to lose? Nothing—and you have everything, hypothetically, to gain.

JL: On the last point, then, to direct us to the second question. I think it flows quite nicely: what motivates people to cling to their particular ideological map of reality, in spite of what you just described? It seems like, to me and to other observers—and this could be an issue of confirmation bias—but it seems like, as you said, we’re at a sort of turning point in Western—I would say global civilization, at this point.

JP: I think so.

JL: The Western-Eastern distinction, I don’t think is any longer that helpful, where people seem to be reacting to what they’re experiencing with an usual degree of ideological fervor.

JP: Yup.

JL: Again, it’s only been about 60 years, 67 years since we saw a major conflagration premised on that issue.

JP: You bet.

JL: How do we avoid this? How do we learn from that? Based on your understanding and your in-depth study of this, what’s the solution, there?

JP: Well, I think the solution is an individual one, because the other solutions are collective, and the collective solutions are, in some sense, the problem. Now, why do people become ideologically possessed? Well, some of it’s just confirmation bias, temperamental bias. Then you can add ignorance to that; then you can add wilful blindness to that. And, with the ignorance issue, you can, more specifically, diagnose historical ignorance. That’s why I recommend that people read The Gulag Archipelago, for example. There’s things that we need to know in order to set ourselves right, and the people that I’ve found that have been most useful in that regard have been Dostoevsky and Nietzsche and Carl Jung, and a smattering of others. I think they had their finger on the pulse, fundamentally. It’s not like they’re the only people. I’m not claiming that at all. But there’s deeper issues, too.

One of the deeper issues is, "what do you do with the responsibility?" If you’re an ideolog, then the bad people are those who don’t think like you. That’s really convenient. Not only do you not have to do anything about it—because you’re already on the side of the good, so it’s alleviated you of any moral responsibility. Yet, you can still act as if you’re the exemplar of morality itself. Plus, you have a target, now, for all the unexamined vengefulness and hate and corruption in your own heart. So that’s a tempting plethora of temptations. It’s easy; it’s quick; it’s handed to you. It means that you don’t have to adopt any responsibility. It means you can camouflage yourself as a moral agent. It means that you have a target for your hatred, and it’s a justifiable target. But I think, of all of those issues, the avoidance of responsibility is the cardinal issue. It’s the most important issue. What I see at the universities is that the students are taught to go out and protest: "there’s the people who are messing up the planet. Go tell them that they’re bad." You don’t offer a solution, even; you just tell them that they’re bad. It’s like, "that’s the pathway to achievement." "No, it’s not."

JL: One can do both, and we see evidence of that in very recent Western political history, right? The civil rights movement…

JP: I think that you can’t do the latter until you earn the right to.

JL: In what sense is it a case that people on both sides… I hate to bifurcate it this way, but it’s perceived this way: two sides of the divide, the left and the right. In what sense is it that people are mistaking the form for the content, in that they may be looking back in history and looking up to movements that involved either speaking truth to power, which I think is part of what motivates a lot of the right, and even the so-called alt-right—just saying things that they should be able to say, regardless of whether it serves the higher moral truth or not. The inclination to protest and speak truth to the power of dominance hierarchy, the power structure, is often what motivates much of what’s on the left. To what degree do you think the conflagration of the coming to the head that we’re experiencing is when people mistake the form of that expression, the form of that protest, for the importance of the content, in the sense of the purity…

JP: Yeah, fine. That’s, again, why I would say it heads back towards the individual.

JL: OK, so how do we collectively solve the individual problem? Or is that not solvable?

JP: I think that we collectively solve the individual problem by noting that the collective is subordinate to the individual, which is really the fundamental Western claim. What’s at the pinnacle of the collective is the piece of the pyramid that detaches itself. That’s the eye. It’s the individual logos, fundamentally, that the collective has to serve; because the logos is the thing that rejuvenates the collective.

JL: Is there a conflation, there, between the individual, as in the individual human being versus or as well as that which is able to speak truth as precisely and clearly as possible? In your mind, are those two melded?

JP: Well, that would be the ideal, that they’re melded: the individual is the truth-bearing vessel, not the collective. The collective is the dead remnants of the past. Now, you need it. It’s a container; it’s necessary; but it’s always out of date. Always. It’s always out of date and, at least, semi-tyrannical, partly because it’s out of date, partly because it’s partly corrupt. But it’s the soul of the individual, the spirit of the individual, we could say, motivated by love, attempting to manifest itself in truth, that’s the cure for that malaise. That’s an ancient, ancient idea. It’s the most ancient written idea that we have. You see it in the Enuma Elish, the Mesopotamian creation myth. That’s Marduk.

JL: Again, from a devil’s advocate perspective, could one not argue that what’s motivating some of the things that have concerned you with respect to the left is advocating precisely for that? The rights for individuals who have thus far been maligned in our society, who were not given the proper space because of stigma.

JP: I do think that, to the degree that the left is motivated by love and the desire for truth, the left does serve that. I think the left has been very effective, in many ways, in holding the concerns of the less fortunate up, so that others can see it. I believe that that’s a valid role the left can play. I believe that they have abandoned that role, because they’re serving a particular ideology. I believe that’s why Hillary Clinton lost the last election: they abandoned the working class. That’s a bad idea, because the working class needs a voice, and the working class is in rough shape, and there’s a variety of reasons for that that are complex. The working class needs a voice. The oppressed need a voice. They need a genuine voice. I think that genuine voice is lacking. I think the left has been hijacked by people who are neither motivated by love nor by truth.

JL: So to concretize this, then—in terms of people’s… at least here in Vancouver, for instance, instinctive reaction to protect otherwise marginalized individuals such as transgender people…

JP: Yes, we are definitely not talking about instinctive reactions. The instinctive reaction is nothing but an impulse. It is not a moral virtue. That’s just maternal instinct, and maternal instinct is just as dangerous as it is benevolent. That was, I suppose, Freud’s major contribution. The Oedipal Mother is the devouring mother. That’s the witch who lives inside the castle or the gingerbread house. She’s just too damn good to be true. The problem with over mothering creatures is that they stay infantile. So the fact that you feel sorry for someone and want to help them is just the bare beginning of what you need to do to actually do something that’s useful; and to confuse that with solving the problem is… "Well, I’m caring!" "Well, yeah. Who cares if you’re caring? Fine! A sparrow is caring. That’s not the issue."

JL: Again, to concretize this, because I think this exercise is extremely useful, based on what we started the conversation with… To take this from the more general to the specific, in terms of, let’s say, protecting transgender people who have been really maligned in society—there’s an incredibly high suicide rate in transgenders. They have difficulty finding work. They have difficulty maintaining normal relationships.

JP: Well, of course they have difficulty maintaining normal relationships. They are not going to maintain a normal relationship. That’s not possible. They’re in an abnormal situation. Now, that doesn’t mean they don’t get to have relationships, but it certainly means they’re not going to be normal. There’s a price to be paid for being different. Now, you could say, "well, that price should be minimized to the degree that that’s possible." Fair enough.

JL: Right, that is the articulated argument of people on the left, even amongst those on the radical left, who you say are motivated by more nefarious…

JP: Yeah, I don’t believe it. In fact, I don’t think the transgender people believe it, because I’ve got letters from about 35 transgender people now, and every single one of them except one said they agreed with me. They do not regard these activists as their legitimate representatives. They are not happy with the fact that this pronoun issue has made them more salient to the community. They don’t trust the people who purport to represent them. Representation requires legitimacy, and just because you’re an activist who says that you care for people, or even if you happen to be a member of that community—which, by the way, is not a community in any sense of the word: it’s a range of people that are just as diverse as any other range of people. None of that gives you legitimacy as a representative. This brings us right back to the beginning. I do not believe that legislation like Bill C-16 is, in the least, in the interest of these people who are marginalized. Quite the contrary: I believe they’re sacrificial victims to the onslaught of a continuing postmodern neo-Marxist ideology.

JL: Right, and I think many people don’t see what you say you see. They don’t see the historical context in which you are observing the phenomenon. As a message to people who are watching this and trying to work through—a lot of young people who are trying to navigate this increasingly perilous minefield of divisive politics in today’s day and age, how do they know… What are the heuristics they use? What are the sign posts they use to understand, "am I on the right path? Is what I’m being taught or attracted to, politically, motivated from a sense of what’s actually best for the community that I am nominally caring for?"

JP: You might say, "well, that requires careful meditation and prayer." If you wanted to be traditional about it, I would say you have to determine… This is a process of soul searching. "What are you oriented towards?" The answer could easily be, "nothing." This is why I produced the Future Authoring Program. You gotta be oriented towards something, because otherwise you’re disoriented. You just spin around in circles, and then you suffer, and so do people around you. It’s not a good solution. Orient yourself towards something. You have to figure out what it is: "what will work for you? What goal would justify the suffering of your life? Start trying to piece that together." You’re going to get better at it, but it’s a personal process, and you should use your education to inform that, so you need a personal place to stand, because otherwise you’re going to be handed a place to stand on a plate, and it may be one that makes you a puppet of someone else’s goals. What are the processes? Well, what I’ve recommended to people is, "clean up your room." That’s a good start. Organize your local landscape. Schedule your time. Start taking control of yourself. See if you can stop saying things you know to be lies. That’s not the same as telling the truth. You don’t get to do that, to begin with, because you’re not good enough at it to even attempt it, in some sense. But everyone can stop saying things they know to be falsehoods. They can use their own damn definition of falsehood.

JL: Right, but in your definition—importantly, I think—falsehood includes the higher-level moral truth.

JP: Yes, it’s living wrong.

JL: You can say something that’s literally true, but, of course, like you said earlier, it’s a black truth, in the sense that, at a moral level, you’re saying something to cause a social effect that is actually negative.

JP: Yes. I would say, "stop saying things that violate your conscience," instead of, "stop saying things that you know to be untrue," because we run into the truth problem. Here’s another idea: stop saying and doing things that make you feel weak. All you have to do is pay attention to that. Some things that you do will make you feel disintegrated. It’s a physiological sensation: disintegrated and weak. It’s something that Carl Rogers commented on. He thought about that as part of… Well, I can’t remember the word. Something like "integrity", but that isn’t the word he used. But some things improve your integrity and some things disintegrate you. Now, the things that disintegrate you, you often do to impress other people, or because you’re taking a shortcut, or you’re escaping what you know to be your moral obligation, and your moral obligation stems naturally from your aims.

Once you have aims, you have moral obligations. They come together, because the moral obligation is what you need to do to obtain the aim. And if you don’t have an aim, then you’re aimless. That’s not a solution. So along with the aims come the moral obligations. Then, when you violate the moral obligations, you’ll have a sense of that violation: "well, you have to stop doing that." Or that’s something you could do. You don’t have to. You don’t have to do anything of this, but that’s where, I would say, people should start. You think it’s small, but it’s not small. I had a girl come up to me last night at the end of my talk, and this happens all the time. She said, "I started cleaning up my room last year, and it completely changed my life." She said, "your room is an externalization of your mind," and that’s right. That’s exactly true: to the degree that you’re in your room, the room is you. Now, that isn’t how people think, but that’s OK. It doesn’t matter if they think that way; that’s how it is. So straighten up what you can straighten up and quit saying things that make you feel weak. Then you’ll know what to do next.

JL: One last point on this, because we’re running short on time, but I would like to touch on this. One point that concerns me is that… Is what you’re saying—because I find so much of what you’ve shared with the world, at this point, using the technological means we have available, to be of immense value. The way you articulate what many of us feel to be true but aren’t able to…

JP: That’s another hallmark of truth, is that it snaps things together. People write to me all the time and say that: "it’s as if things were coming together in my mind." It’s like, "well, that’s what archetypes do. Archetypes glue things together." So, yes. The proper expression of unconscious Being teaches people what they already know. It’s kind of like the Platonic idea that all learning was remembering. It’s right. It’s not right exactly the way we would think of learning and remembering now, but you have a nature, and when you feel that nature articulated, it’s…

JL: It’s like the act of snapping the puzzle pieces together. They’re right there.

JP: Yes. That’s bringing the level of Being into synchrony. That’s what you feel. It’s like, "oh, that’s synchronized now. What I think and the way I feel have come together," and you feel that snap. It’s like, "oh, it’s a simpler state"—it’s something like that—"it’s not rife with contradictions anymore."

JL: So just to followthrough on this thought, then—what concerns me, to a degree, is… and maybe it shouldn’t concern me, but I’ll express this anyway. There’s such value in what you’ve been sharing, for the reasons we just discussed a second ago. But because of the context in which this arose recently, some of your ideas have been taken up by people on the right, who may suffer from exactly the same kinda of ideological possession issues that you argue some people on the extreme left suffer from. The degree to which what you’ve been arguing or putting forth or sharing with people becomes conflated with the ideologically possessed arguments on the right, or the alt-right, is deeply concerning for someone who feels and knows that what you have to say is so incredibly valuable, because people, well, they’ll just…

JP: I’ve had many, many people write me from the fringes of the radical right, saying precisely that listening to my lectures stopped them from going all the way. So I would say that, if people listen to what I’m saying, then that isn’t going to happen. Now, has my message been coopted? I would say, to a much lesser degree than people think. All you have to do is go read the YouTube comments, and there’s thousands and thousands of them. YouTube comments… most of them are generated by denizens from the pits of hell. They’re really dismissive, aggressive, rude, vulgar, thoughtless, provocative, prejudicial. You name it, man.

JL: We were discussing—before, off camera—the notion of, I think it’s called Godwin’s law, where, at a certain point, a YouTube or any internet discussion will degenerate into nasty comparisons.

JP: Right, exactly. Exactly. But that isn’t what characterizes the comments stream on my YouTube videos, with very rare exceptions. So I don’t believe that what I’ve been discussing has been coopted to any significant degree. I think that what has happened is that, at this time and place, for some reason, it isn’t the people on the left who are are particularly open to the message, but that’s because I think that they’re far more gripped by the totalitarian spirit than people aligned along the rest of the spectrum—and they also have more power. They have more institutional power of a certain type, particularly in the universities, but not only.

JL: I was going to say, this sounds like a highly academic context that you’re describing, and I’ve experienced what you’re identifying, so I can relate to that. But in terms of—what concerns me is looking at the wider societal and global context. There is definitely a resurgence of the right, and, as someone whose family, for instance, suffered under the Nazi regime… It’s disturbing.

JP: Well, it’s the polarization, eh? The polarization is disturbing. What I try to recommend to people—and I did in my talk last night, for example—is that they find someone that they don’t agree with and have a conversation with them. Now, it has to be someone that you can have a conversation with, but a lot of that will just involve listening. We have to extend out hands across the gap, because otherwise we’ll polarize. That’s what’s happening. You saw it in Berkley last week. That could be just the beginning, and there’s lots of people who would like that. That’s not a good idea. It’s a very bad idea. It’s still my estimation that, at the moment, it’s the radicals on the left that are primarily responsible for this, and they’re primarily responsible particularly because of their stance on free speech. Like, I can’t go to Linfield College now. Some arbitrary administrator used a specious excuse to say, "no, he can’t come," even though I was invited. I was already invited. I already paid for the air fare. They feel there is a large coterie of people who feel that it’s in their bailiwick to determine who can speak, and that’s a very bad idea.

JL: So, to clarify for people—because I think the way you’re describing this inherently speaks to people on the… And, again, I hesitate to buy into this bifurcation, but people who identity, at the moment, with the right.

JP: Well, put it this way: the campuses have not been infiltrated by right-wing radicals. Not at all. Not in the least.

JL: The campuses.

JP: Yeah. Well, the problem with that is that the campuses, the humanities—let’s lay it out again: theology at the bottom; philosophy after that. Well, that’s where the humanities are. The humanities are nearest to the foundation of our culture, and they’re completely dominated by radical leftists, postmodern neo-Marxists. And that’s not my opinion. That’s well documented. There aren’t even conservatives in those domains, let alone right-wingers. There’s not even any conservatives—I mean, maybe you can call conservatives "right wing". I mean, you’re pushing your luck, when you do that. But there’s not conservatives, even. So the centrists are on the right, as far as the people in the humanities are concerned. Well, that’s not good; and it’s seriously not good, because the humanities have way more effect on our culture than we think. Way more.

JL: In what sense do you think the rise—and, in some sense, frightening—resurgence of popularity in right-wing and even in extreme right-wing political movements, as opposed to what’s on campus, is a semi-conscious reaction to the possession of, as you were saying, the inherent ideological foundations of our society being…

JP: I think it’s exactly that. I mean, it’s more than that, because things get amalgamated. It’s always useful for people to find someone to hate and hit. So that motivation drives radicals on both sides of the political spectrum, right? Obviously you can see that, because it’s starting to happen. But it’s certainly the case that—look, if the democrats wouldn’t have played identity politics, Hillary would have won the election. It’s as simple as that—and people should also know that it wasn’t just the federal Presidency that the Democrats lost. They lost everything, at the state level, too. It’s like they’re pushing people too hard, and they have their ideological reasons for it, and I don’t find them credible. It’s the grounding in postmodernism, and this secret grounding underneath that in neo-Marxism; and people are not going to put with that, and they shouldn’t.

JL: I think we have to wrap up, but would you be willing to say, for the record and to the camera—and if you’re not, that’s fine—but would you be willing to say that you yourself do not identify with the what appear to be, for some of us, more insidious elements of the right?

JP: I’m not political. I’ve made my decision. Many times, I’ve thought about running for political office. And, if I did, in Canada, the most logical place for me to be would be in the Liberal party. Although, I think that it’s also been hijacked by the social justice warrior types, to a very damaging degree. Especially, you see that in Ontario. But I’ve decided at multiple points in my life that I’m not playing at the political level. I’m playing at the philosophical level, or maybe I’m playing at the theological level. What I’m trying to do is to say what I think as clearly as I possible can, and to listen to the feedback and modify my message when that seems to be necessary. Apart from that, I’m willing to let the chips fall where they will, because that’s also part of the decision. The decision is, if you choose to act as if the truth brings Being into existence in the best possible manner, then you speak your truth, you examine your conscience, you listen to feedback, and you allow the events to unfold as they will. I am trying to do that. That’s what I’m attempting to do.

JL: So the very final question, then, on that point: you’ve mentioned how what’s most important to you is having the space, both individually and as a society, to think through the things that you are trying to make sense of in public or with others—to be able to freely articulate what…

JP: To jointly articulate it. Yes.

JL: And we don’t know how to do it right at the beginning.

JP: Right. Definitely not.

JL: We need that space to make mistakes.

JP: Right, absolutely. Yes—and even to make them publicly.

JL: Is there anything personally, now, looking back, that maybe you haven’t said thus far—maybe you have, or maybe something you haven’t—that, knowing what you know now, having gone through what’s happened over the last year or so, that you would reformulate? Is there any correction or corrective measure that you would take, to more clearly articulate things that you articulated back when this…

JP: Well, I would say that I’m trying to do that on an ongoing basis. I mean, right from the beginning, after the first video went roughly viral, I have a group of friends, who span the political spectrum, who stood by me, let’s say, as well as my family, and I’m talking to them constantly about what I’m doing wrong. I have learned, to some degree, how to harness part of the energy of anger, as a source of energy. Now, that has its advantage and disadvantages. Its advantage is a certain kind of forcefulness. It’s also a good suppressor—a good competitor for fear, because anger suppresses fear. The feedback I’ve received is that, the more reasonable I am, the better. That, of course, makes sense. And then, there’s been plethora of small and specific criticisms, and I’ve tried to attend to them as carefully as I can.

I’ve been in this situation, especially for the first four months, where, had I said one thing that was self-evidently non-credible, that would have justified a claim of bigotry or racism or any of those things, I would have been sunk. I wouldn’t say I’m pleased with my performance, because it isn’t a performance, and it isn’t something to be pleased about or displeased about. But I can say that, to the degree that it’s possible, I’ve done my best to do what I said I’m doing, which is to say what I think as clearly as I can. That’s all I’m trying to do. When I go in front of people, I’m not trying to convince them of anything. I’m really not. It’s up to them. I don’t want to convince people of something. They’re responsible for their own suffering. I don’t want to manipulate their destinies. I don’t believe that I know enough about the particularities of their life to dare to do that.

What I do when I speak to people is try to formulate my thoughts on that particular topic more clearly. That’s my lecture style. I’m thinking. I’m not delivering a prepackaged talk. I mean, now and then I’ll write it, but that’s only when I’m developing a really new idea and it has to be a structured argument. I’ve only done that in like three of my YouTube videos. It’s very rare. Most of the time, I have a skeleton: there’s the argument; there’s the skeleton outline. I see where I’m going, to get from point A, to B, to C. And then, when I’m talking, like today, it’s an exploration. It’s not, "here’s what I think. It’s right, and you should believe it." It’s like, "no! I’m trying to rectify my errors and extend what I know, when I’m speaking and when I’m listening." I think that genuinely is what I’m doing, and I genuinely don’t want to give people advice. It’s something I’ve learned, not least by being a psychotherapist. It’s like, "your destiny is not mine to mess with. I don’t want to be responsible for your decisions. What if I’m wrong?"

JL: Nonetheless, as you said, you do have the impulse to want the best [inaudible] individual.

JP: Well, yes. We could have a productive discussion about what might be the best for you, and I do that with my clients all the time. They come and see me, and they’ve got problems, and I say, "OK, well, if we can come up with a solution, what would that solution look like? Let’s lay the cards on the table. We can explore a bunch of different solutions." But I’m really trying—and this partly the influence of Carl Rogers. I’m really trying to help the person find their own way, because that’s not going to be my way. It’s going to be their way. And if they find their way, that will be best for them, and it will be best for the people around them, so it’ll be best for me, for that matter. So it’s in my interest, in my selfish self-interest, to help the other person find his or her way, and not my way—except insofar as my way is trying to explore and generate more accurate representations of the world.

JL: Right, so is there a concrete example—just to end on this note of concretization that we’ve discussed and the importance of bringing it to a cognitive level that is familiar and embodied for us. Is there a concrete example of something where you said something—and I’m not thinking of anything in particular. I’m being entirely genuine, here. Is there an instance where you feel you said something that appeared to be true to you at the time, and, knowing what you know…

JP: Yes. I think I was a little dismissive of the Men Going Their Own Way, because I think I called them "pathetic weasels." I had my reasons for that. My reasons were, roughly speaking…

JL: Who are the Men Going Their Own Way?

JP: Oh, they’re a group of people, mostly on the net, who’ve been burned in their relationships, or who conceptualize themselves as having been burned in their relationships; and they believe that the legal structure, in particular in Western countries, is so tilted against men, particularly in family dispute situations and divorce settlement, that it’s safer for men to not establish permanent relationships with women, not to cohabit with them, ever. They’re a large movement. Now, how large they are, I don’t know. But they’re large enough, and they have what I regard as an undue influence over relatively bitter and resentful young men, who haven’t had great success in the dating market, and who are looking for a rationale to write off all women, because they’re so hurt by their continual rejection.

That’s not good for those young men. And so the reason I disparaged the Men Going Their Own Way is because I had seen the pernicious effect—these are often older guys—of their world-weary philosophy on young men. Now, these guys think that they’re just warning them, and they are warning them, but they’re not "just" warning them. The reason I regret calling them "pathetic weasels" is because they also have a point. I do believe that the court systems are staggeringly anti-male—absurdly, horribly anti-male. I’ve seen my own clients, some of them who were really, really decent, hardworking, family-oriented people, demolished by the court systems. So the Men Going Their Own Way have a point, and I’m sorry I called them "pathetic weasels," but I outlined my reasons. So, yes, I do regret that. I have to be careful, because I do have a dark, satirical sense of humor, and I can utter epithets, let’s say, for the sake of punctuating a point, while simultaneously forgetting that 150,000 people will listen to it. So I regret that.

Other than that… I’m judging my behaviour on the degree to which my trajectory is upward, and I believe that I have responsibly improved the articulation of my arguments with every iteration of them; and I think that, had that not been happening, I would have been taught a very serious lesson, because there were plenty of people—and still are—who would be perfectly happy to see me be taught a very serious lesson. It’s quite terrifying. I’m on a tightrope. It’s not as much a tightrope as it was, but for a long time, for months, had I said anything erroneous or insufficiently careful, I would have been in trouble—and, had anybody dug up anything I said in the past. That’s worked in my favour, because, of course, when I made these public pronouncements, there was already 500 hours of videos online. And so, had I been a reprehensible individual… Unless I was capable of deceit that far exceeds the average, there would have been some line, somewhere, in one of the videos that I made, when I was having an off day, where I said something that could be taken out of context and used to smear me. but that hasn't happened, and I think the reason that hasn’t happened is because—touch wood—those utterances actually don’t exist.

JL: That’s a great point to end on. Thank you so much. We’ve gone way over time, but I think it was worth it.

JP: Good. Yup, I think it was good.


Lewis Howes: Welcome, everyone, back to the School of Greatness Podcast. We’ve got the legendary Jordan Peterson in the house. Good to see you, sir.

Dr. Jordan Peterson: Good to see you.

LH: I’m very excited about this. You’ve got a book out called 12 Rules for Life. Make sure you guys check this out. You probably already got it, but if you don’t, I’m telling you, go pick it up right now. An Antidote to Chaos. You’ve had so much attention over the last couple years, and I’ve been digging into the research, and I’ve just been fascinated by everything that you’ve been up to. I just love your stance and the vision you have for humanity, in terms of how we can all live better lives. I think you simplify a lot of things in this book, which, some things, people don’t like to simplify; they like to complicate. I think that’s what’s gotten you a lot of attention, is that you try to really simplify a lot of these things.

JP: Well, I try to make everything concrete, so it’s actually implementable. I mean, there’s a lot of high level abstractions in the book, because it ranges up into the theological and the philosophical, but it’s always grounded in what you can actually do in your life, practically. You want to bridge that gap, from the highest abstraction down to the lowest level of behaviour, so that it becomes implementable. That’s how philosophical concepts take on their meaning. They have to have some impact on the ways you see the world and the way you act in the world, or they’re not fully realized, they’re not understood. Partly, what we mean, I would say, when we say that we understand something—it’s kind of a strange phrase: "to understand something." But it means to be able to embody it, and a shift of view, and a shift of action. And then you’ve got it. It’s graspable. It’s in your hand.

LH: Embody something, and a shift of view, and a shift of action.

JP: Well, they’re the same thing. Your perceptions are very tightly linked to your actions because, of course, when you’re acting, you’re aiming at something. You have to be devoted towards some aim, some target. We play that out in sports all the time. That’s why sports are so entertaining for people, because they dramatize the idea of aim. And not only of aim, but of the pursuit of excellence in pursuit of that aim. That’s the game, and the reason it’s a spectacle and the reason people participate in it is because it dramatizes something absolutely essential about life. And so you want to take philosophical abstractions, and you want to use them to structure your aim,. And then your perceptions organize around that aim, and then you act it out, and then you’ve got it. Then it’s become part of your life. It’s not just a philosophical abstraction that floats free in space.

LH: Why is there so much conflict in the world? Is it because there’s so many different perceptions that people have, and that they think should be right?

JP: There’s conflict because we have real problems. Life is actually difficult, independent of psychological foolishness, let’s say—independent of the obstacles that we put in our own path.

LH: It’s already challenging.

JP: It’s already fatally challenging. Life is the ultimate challenge.

LH: We will die.

JP: Yes.

LH: And there is a challenge: uncertainty, fear, pain, all of those things.

JP: Yes, everything that goes along with suffering is a challenge, and it’s the full challenge, because it takes everything you have. Part of the reason we disagree is because there are complex problems to solve, and then we also disagree because we’re wilfully blind and because we’re more ignorant than we should be, and we’re not everything we should be, and we tilt towards malevolence from time to time, and we betray each other and ourselves. So we take a bad lot, in many ways, and make it worse. Now, not always, obviously, and we don’t have to. But that’s sort of the baseline that we’re working against. I think people are most disappointed in life when they’re disappointed in themselves. They see that they’ve made things worse than they had to be, even though the baseline can be pretty brutal. So the book—and all my lectures, I suppose—are put forward in an attempt to take the high level philosophical abstractions and to make them into something that’s actionable.

LH: To take the next best action in your life, to improve your life, so we don’t have to suffer as much.

JP: And, hopefully, also so that people around you don’t have to either. So one of the things I’ve been talking to my audiences about is the relationship between responsibility and meaning, which is… What would you say… It’s a constant refrain in the book. It’s one of its underlying messages, let’s say—themes is a better way of thinking about it. If you start with the presumption that there is a baseline of suffering in life, and that that can be exaggerated as a consequence of human failing, as a consequence of malevolence and betrayal and self-betrayal and deceit, and all those things that we do to each other and ourselves that we know aren’t good, that amplifies the suffering. That’s sort of the baseline against which you have to work. It’s contemplation of that that often makes people hopeless and depressed and anxious and overwhelmed and all of that, and they have their reasons. But you need something to put up against that, and what you put up against that is meaning. Meaning is actually the instinct that helps you guide yourself through that catastrophe. Most of that meaning is to be found in the adoption of responsibility. So if you think, for example, about the people that you admire, well, you think about when you have a clear conscience, first, because that’s a good thing to aim at, which is something different than happiness.

LH: A clear conscience is different than happiness.

JP: Yeah, it’s better.

LH: Yeah. You’re not guilting yourself, you’re not feeling bad about yourself. Clean.

JP: That’s right. You feel that you’ve justified your existence, so you’re not waking up at three in the morning in a cold sweat, thinking about all the terrible things that you’ve involved yourself in.

LH: What you said to someone that you shouldn’t have said, or how you acted or lied.

JP: Or what opportunity you lost, or the things that you’ve let go that you should’ve capitalized on, and all of that. And so when you think about the times when you’re at peace with yourself, with regards to how you’re conducting yourself in the world, it’s almost always conditions under which you’ve adopted a responsibility. At least, the most guilt, I think, that you can experience, perhaps, is the sure knowledge that you’re not even taking care of yourself, so that you’re leaving that responsibility to other people; because that’s pretty pathetic, unless you’re psychopathic, and you’re living a parasitical life. That characterizes a very small minority of people, and an even smaller minority think that’s justifiable. But, most of the time, you’re in guilt and shame, because not only are you not taking care of yourself, let’s say—so someone else has to—but you’re not living up to your full potential. And so there’s an existential weight that goes along with that.

LH: So you suffer even more, when you don’t take care of yourself or take the best actions or do the work that you know you can do, and you rely on someone else to support you financially, emotionally, physically, home, whatever it may be.

JP: Yeah, because you’re not only not being what you could be, you’re interfering with someone else being what they could be. So you’re not only a void, you’re a drain. Jesus, that’s a catastrophe.

LH: We usually don’t even know it, when we’re in that situation, because we’re in a depressed state, or we’re…

JP: Or we don’t want to see it. You admire yourself—or, perhaps, you can at least live with yourself—when you’re taking responsibility, at least, for yourself. That settles your conscience. And then, if you look at the people you spontaneously admire… The act of spontaneously admiring someone is the manifestation of the instinct for meaning. This is partly why people are so enamoured of sports figures, because the sports figures are playing out the drama of attaining the goal—of attaining a certain kind of, let’s say, psychological and physical perfection in pursuit of a goal. That’s the drama. And to spontaneously admire that is to have that instinct for meaning latch on to something that can be used as a model, and then that model should be transcribed into something that’s applicable in life. In an athletic performance, you really like to see someone who’s extremely disciplined and in shape—so something physically remarkable—and to stretch themselves even beyond their previous exploits, because you really like to see a brilliant move in an athletic match. But you also like to see that person ensconced in a broader moral framework, so that not only are they trying to win and disciplining themselves in pursuit of that victory, and then stretching themselves so they’re continually getting better, but they’re doing it in a way that helps develop their whole team and is good for the sport in general and reflects well in the broader culture.

LH: They’re a great leader on their team, they’re positive, they’re good competitors, they’re not negative towards other people that are lifting them up, too. They’re like the ultimate human.

JP: That’s right, so that they can work for their own improvement in a way that simultaneously works for the improvement of the team, and for the sport, and then, to the degree that that spills over into the broader culture, so much the better. So that’s all been dramatized in an athletic event. It’s not philosophical. It’s concrete. It’s dramatized in the world, and that’s what the games represent. It’s partly because, well, in some sense, life is a game.

LH: It is.

JP: The analogy is that in life, like in sports, you’re setting forth an aim and then arranging your perceptions and your actions in pursuit of that aim—and that you also, generally, do it while cooperating and competing with other people. So that’s also the game-like element, as well. All of that’s dramatized in athletics. That’s like philosophy for people who aren’t philosophical, and I’m not being smart about that. It really is philosophy for people who aren’t being philosophical, because it’s played out. You can see the spontaneous appreciation for the human spirit manifest itself when you see people rise to their feet spontaneously in a sports arena, when they see someone do something particularly remarkable—see an athlete who’s extremely trained stretch themselves beyond what you think is a normative human limit. Everyone celebrates that spontaneously, so it’s quite something to behold.

LH: Coming back to responsibility and meaning, when we’re watching sports or someone do this act, what does this do for us in terms of responsibility and meaning?

JP: Well, it helps us figure out what we can imitate.

LH: It gives us a model.

JP: Yes, it’s a model.

LH: "Here’s a model of something I respect."

JP: Well, what philosophy is—or even theology, for that matter—is an abstract model. It’s laid out in the words. Now, the problem, often, is that it becomes so abstract that people don’t know how to bring it back down to embodiment, whereas something like the drama of a sports event is sort of midway between philosophy and action. It’s not entirely abstracted, because it’s not only coded in words. It’s acted out.

LH: It’s visual. You can see an example of what happens, and you can try to reverse engineer how they did that.

JP: Well, yes. Exactly. At least, the fact that you admire the person means that you might try to start to act like them—and maybe that would mean that you start to discipline yourself with regards to a particular sport. But it might also be that you start to mimic or, at least, are affected in some way by their sportsmanlike behaviour, which is the ground of a certain kind of ethic; because if you can play well with others, which is sort of the hallmark of a good sport, that actually means that you're a reasonably sophisticated and civilized person. It’s really important to learn to play well with others. That’s the ground of ethics.

LH: If you can do it there, in that setting, hopefully you can translate it into a life setting.

JP: That’s exactly right. That’s what you hope for. If the goal of the game is to put the ball into the net, then the goal of having games is to produce people who can take proper aim no matter where they are. That’s exactly what we’re trying to do with athletics. So I’ve been talking to my audiences a lot about that. And there’s more to it, too, because if the background of life is—there’s an ineradicable component of suffering, and that’s complicated by, let’s say, malevolence and the proclivity of people to betray themselves and others, which complicates it and makes it worse, then, if you don’t have a noble aim. If that isn’t imbuing your life with sustainable meaning, then you fall prey to all the catastrophe, the pain and the anxiety and the anger that that suffering generates. That makes you bitter.

LH: What I’m hearing you say is that—and correct me if I’m wrong—we must have an aim in our life, no matter what stage of life we’re in, and if we don’t have some type of aim, even if, for a few months, of an aim of going somewhere, some direction, the suffering’s going to be even more suffering—

JP: Pointless.

LH: —because we’re already going to face the greatest challenges in life.

JP: That’s right. You’re stuck with it.

LH: We’re already struggling.

JP: That’s right. There’s no way out of that.

LH: Adversity’s coming no matter what. We have big goals or a small little goal, whatever it may be, but it’s going to be less suffering, if we have an aim.

JP: Yeah, well, it’s worse than that, even, because the suffering is pain and the suffering is anxiety and uncertainty and the suffering is hopelessness, but the consequence of all of that is that you get bitter, and when you get bitter, you get mean, and you get cruel, and you start to hurt yourself and other people. So it’s not only that if you don’t have a goal you suffer, it’s that if you don’t have a goal, you suffer and then you get cruel and bitter and resentful, and then you start to actively make the world a worse place. You can’t suffer pointlessly without becoming bitter, and you can’t become bitter without becoming cruel. So you need an aim. Then the question, of course, is what you should aim—

LH: A bitter aim.

JP: Yeah, hah. A bitter aim. That’s for sure. So then the question is, "what should your aim be?" Now, we have a program. It’s one of the things I wanted to talk to you about today. I have this website called SelfAuthoring.com, and that program helps people write about their life. There’s a Past Authoring Program. To establish your aim, you have to know where you are. It’s like you’re trying to orient yourself on a map. You can’t orient yourself on a map unless you know where you are. You also have to know where you’re going, so those are the two relevant things. The Past Authoring Program helps people write about their lives, so it’s a guided autobiography. We ask people to break their life up into six epochs, six sections, and then to write about the emotionally important events in those epochs, and to detail out the positive things and why more of that could conceivably happen in the future, and to detail out why the negative things happened, and to try to understand why, with an aim to not replicate them in the future. The purpose of memory isn’t to remember the past. The purpose of memory is so that you figure out what went wrong when something went wrong, so you don’t duplicate it in the future. That’s the purpose of memory. The Past Authoring Program can help people catch up, and you know you have to catch up if you have memories that are older than about a year and a half that still cause you emotional pain when you think about them. Or if you dwell on them, they come spontaneously back to mind, it means that there’s part of your life that you haven’t mapped out properly, and it still has emotional valence that’s gripping you.

LH: You’re still holding on to that story.

JP: Or it’s still holding on to you.

LH: Interesting. You have to let it go.

JP: Yeah, well, you haven’t been able to navigate your way through it. There’s a pitfall, there, that you fell in, and you don’t know how to avoid similar pitfalls in the future, and that’s why your brain won’t let it go. That’s what the anxiety systems do. It’s like, "this happened to you, it wasn’t good. This happened to you, it wasn’t good. This happened to you, it wasn’t good. Fix it, fix it, fix it, fix it." That will never go away, unless you fix it.

LH: How do you fix it?

JP: Well, you have to figure out why it happened. That’s the first thing. It’s like, "how was it that that situation arose to pull you down?" And that’s not simple. That’s why we have the writing program, because it’s complicated to think it through. But if you face it, and you meditate on it, let’s say, and you do this voluntarily, there’s a pretty high probability that you’ll be able to decrease the probability that it will be repeated in the future. The second part of the program helps people do an analysis of their virtues and their faults—same sort of idea: "what’s good about you that you could capitalize on? What’s weak about you that you need to fix, so it doesn’t bring you down?" That’s the Present Authoring Program.

The Future Authoring Program is probably most relevant to you and your listeners, because you’re interested in helping people establish aims. So we already talked about the fact that you need an aim in life, or that’s where you derive your meaning; and, without that, things go to hell, as literally as that can be taken. But it’s not easy to ask people to say—well, it’s easy to ask them, "what do you want in your life?" It’s a very hard question to answer, because it’s too vague and grand. In the Future Authoring Program, we help people break that down. Put yourself in the right frame of mind. "Whats the right frame of mind?" Rule 2 in this book: "treat yourself like you’re someone who you’re responsible for helping." What that means is you have to start from the presupposition that, despite all your flaws and insufficiencies, it’s worth having you around, and it would be ok if things were better for you. So you need to take care of yourself, like you’re taking care of someone you care for. There’s a bit of detachment, in that. The next thing is, "OK, look three to five years down the road. You get to have what you need and want, assuming you’re being reasonable and you actually want it, which means you’re willing to make the sacrifices that would make it possible."

LH: What do you mean by "reasonable"?

JP: Well, that’s the next thing. "Within your grasp." That would be something.

LH: What if it’s out of your grasp, but you still push hard enough to potentially get it?

JP: Then you need an incremental plan. You need to break that goal down into steps.

LH: Not some crazy goal within a year that you haven’t even done the work to master a skill at.

JP: Yeah, well, that’s it. You can have a high-end goal, and more power to you if you do, but you need a pathway to it.

LH: Absolutely.

JP: If it’s 10 stories up above you, you need a staircase to get there, right? And so you have to build the staircase, too. And so in the Future Authoring Program, you’re asked, first of all, "OK, you get to have what you want and need. That’s the proposition. But you have to aim at it. You have to define it and aim at it." Then the first thing is, "OK, if you could put your family together the way you wanted it to be, what would that look like?" So that might be your siblings and your parents, but that also might be your wife or your husband and your kids, assuming that you're at that point in your life. "If you could have the family you wanted, what would that look like?" Ok—career. Same thing. You get to have the career or the job that is within your grasp, necessary, and suitable for you, if you are taking care of yourself. "How are you going to educate yourself? Because you’re not as smart as you could be. There’s lots more things that you need to know, so you gotta keep learning and moving forward, so you need a plan for that. How are you going to take care of yourself mentally and physically? How are you going to avoid the catastrophic temptations, for example, of drugs and alcohol? because that pulls a lot of people down. You need a plan for that. Are you going to be a social drinker? how much are you going to drink? how much is too much? what about your drug use? You gotta regulate that, so it isn’t a pitfall. How are you going to use your time meaningfully and productively outside of work? You need to plan for that."

There’s one other that’s slipped my mind at the moment. I think there’s seven initial questions, and I don’t remember the last one. Oh, intimate relationship, of course: "do you want a long-term stable intimate relationship, and, if you do, how would you like that to lay itself out?” You gotta have a vision for that, because if you don’t have a vision, you’re not going to aim at it, and if you don’t aim at it, then you won’t even see the opportunities when they arise." That’s the thing that’s so cool. I wrote about this in chapter 10, which is, "be precise in your speech." It’s a chapter about the fact that aims structure your perceptions. So, for example, once you aim at something, the perceptual structures in your brain and your visual cortex reorient themselves to calculate a pathway to the aim. What they show you in the world is obstacles to that path and open pathways to the path. That’s actually how the world reveals itself, just like when you’re driving in a car and you have a map and you aim a particular place, then all the things that related to that place show up in the world. It’s exactly the same thing, because you are travelling through time and space, and you need a map. So after you answer these seven questions—and you’re encouraged to do it badly, because you don’t have to be a perfectionist.

LH: Just complete it.

JP: Just complete it, right, because a bad plan is better than no plan. It gives you something to improve. So even if your aim is vague, and even if it’s off target, if you start aiming, and you see you're off target, then you can shift, and you can make it more precise.

LH: You can start to recognize what you don’t want. "Oh, I thought I wanted this, but I don’t. Let me re-navigate and figure out what I do want."

JP: Exactly.

LH: And you might have to try a bunch of things.

JP: Well, you will have to. That’s why you shouldn’t be perfectionistic about. You absolutely will be wrong, but you won’t be as wrong as would have been, if you were aimless. There’s a bit of humility.

LH: No man’s land is worse than…

JP: No man’s land is worse than a bad path. That’s exactly right.

LH: Oh, I like that one.

JP: That’s a good one, and it’s right: you don’t want to be in no man’s land. Why did you use that phrase? because that’s right. That’s exactly right.

LH: I think, for me, the idea of walking around aimlessly is like the worst idea in the world. It’s zero purpose, zero mission, zero certainty at all. It’s like walking around in no man’s land, aimlessly.

JP: It’s funny, too, because in no man’s land, everyone’s shooting at you—because that’s a military term. No man’s land is the space between two enemy positions.

LH: The middle, where everyone’s coming at you.

JP: You bet. So if you’re aimless, you’re also at a place where everything is shooting at you. So it’s a very good metaphor, that came to mind.

LH: That’s deep. Wow.

JP: That’s very, very cool. So, then, we say to people, "OK, look. Now you’ve thought about this for a while." It’s nice to do this over a couple of days, too, because you get to sleep on it, and that helps to reorient yourself. "OK, now write for 20 minutes. Don’t worry about grammar or spelling. This isn’t a composition exercise. You get to have what you want three to five years down the road. What does your life look like, hypothetically? Write it out." That’s the first part. The second part of the exercise—now you’ve got your thing to aim at. You think, "well, now I’m motivated, because I got my thing to aim at." It’s like, "you’re not as motivated as you could be, because you don’t yet have your thing to run away from. If you really want to be motivated, you want to be going somewhere, and you want to be not going somewhere else."

LH: Which, typically, is a pain.

JP: Yes, a pain or an anxiety. Some domain of suffering and guilt, let’s say.

LH: "I don’t want to feel this anymore."

JP: Yes, exactly. Exactly. So the other thing we ask people is, "OK, now take stock of your weaknesses, and imagine that you let them multiply. You got hopeless, and you augured in, and things were as bad for you as they could be in three to five years."

LH: What are some examples of weaknesses that people might have?

JP: They lie, they procrastinate, they avoid, they’re grandiose, they’re narcissistic, they’re undisciplined, they’re nihilistic, they’re aimless. All of those things.

LH: Victim mentality.

JP: Victim mentality, they take the quick way out, they pursue impulsive pleasures, they sacrifice meaning for expediency, they don’t take care of their basic responsibilities, they fight stupidly with their parents, they don’t negotiate properly with their spouse, they’re bitter at work because they haven't said what they have to say, they haven’t thought through what they’re doing tomorrow, they drink too much, they smoke too much, they take too many drugs, they don’t regulate their…

LH: They don’t work out. Yeah, got it.

JP: And everyone knows, man. Everyone knows, and everyone’s got a set of weaknesses that they know about. And so you say, "all right…"

LH: What are three weakness that you know right now you could still work on, and three things you think are really…

JP: Well, a lot of things are things that I’ve taken care of in my life—like, I used to smoke. When I was a kid, I used to smoke a pack a day. I used to drink a lot. I didn’t work out. I wasn’t nearly as disciplined as I should have been. I wasn’t as careful with what I was saying.

LH: Your words were loose.

JP: My most likely negative outcome probably would have been—I really liked to drink. Alcohol is a really good drug for me.

LH: Is that why you did your thesis on that?

JP: Well, partly. It was mostly because the opportunity came up for me to investigate drug and alcohol use. But I came from a little town in Northern Alberta, and it was a heavy drinking town. That could have been a real trap, for me. So anyways, we have these people. We say, "OK, you know your weaknesses, and you know what particular hell you would descend to, if you allowed yourself to descend into it, because you probably had a taste of it. If you really let that go, and you’re in a terrible place in three to five years, because you haven’t done what you should do, what does that look like? Write that down, so you know." One of the things you want to have behind you—let’s say you have to do something difficult, like go confront your boss. Well, maybe hope isn’t enough to encourage you to do that. You think, "well, no. If I don’t go confront my boss, carefully and intelligently, then I’m going to hate my job, then I’m going to drink more, then I’m going to end up in that little hell place that I designed for myself." It’s like, "oh, I’m not going there, but I don’t want to talk to my boss, or I don't want to confront my wife or my husband or my father—or my children, for that matter. But if I don’t…"

LH: "Then I’ll resent myself, or I’ll resent…"

JP: "I’m going to end up going down this terrible pathway." Sometimes, when you’re moving forward, you have to do something difficult. You might think, "well, why bother?" The answer is, "well, so I don’t end up in hell. How about that?" "Oh, yeah! There’s that."

LH: If you don’t experience the pain now, or the difficulty now, you’re going to have a deeper pain later.

JP: Yeah, yeah. That’s life.

LH: A much deeper pain later. That’s why—I think that you mention, at one point, that putting ourselves into structured pain, like a structured sense of feeling pain throughout the day, whether it be the tough conversation… "I don’t want to do that because it’s painful, but I’m going to, because I know, afterwards, it’s probably going to feel better."

JP: It’s a bit of a sacrifice. Sacrifice stability in the present for a gain in the future. That’s the big discovery of human beings.

LH: Were you a big athlete growing up?

JP: No. I was a small kid, and I skipped a grade. Although, I skied, and I went cross-country skiing. It’s individual sports, mostly with my dad.

LH: You’ll understand, then, in order to improve as an athlete or in any sport, you have to put yourself through daily pain. If you want to achieve that model of excellence that you watch someone playing basketball as a child, and you see someone living this model, it’s going to be 15 years of deliberate pain.

JP: Yeah, that’s a discipline, man. Well, I worked out for a long time with weights.

LH: So you know. You’ve felt it every day. You didn’t want to push through pain, but you knew it would get you a greater result.

JP: Yeah, and it’s easier not to do it than to do it, but not in the long run. I’ve really seen the benefits, for example, from weight lifting, because I’m 58… How old am I? 56.

LH: You look great.

JP: I’ve really noticed the difference, when they age, between people who laid down a good physiological platform when they were young and those who didn’t, because if you haven’t worked out—weights particularly, I would say—you start to get pretty soft in your 30s, and your cardiovascular system starts to go really early. The other thing, too, is that the best thing you can do to maintain cognitive ability isn’t to do exercises like Lumosity. It’s not brain exercises that keep you sharp. It’s exercise, both cardiovascular and weight lifting. So if you’re 50, you can restore your cognitive function to the level of a 30 year old through exercise.

LH: Your mental function through physical activity.

JP: Yeah, well, your brain is a very demanding organ, and if your cardiovascular system is compromised, then you get stupid.

LH: Wow. So as you move, and the bigger you get, the more stupid you become.

JP: Well, you compromise its function, because the brain is the organ that uses more—it’s very metabolically demanding. If you’re not in good physical shape, then one of the things that suffers most greatly is your cognitive function. So that’s quite an interesting thing, to see how tight that linkage is. In the next part of the program: ok, now you’ve got a vision.

LH: Even if it’s a bad one, it’s OK.

JP: That’s right. It’s better than no vision at all. It’s something that you can improve. You’re trying to get through a territory you don’t understand, and here’s your options: no map, a map that’s not so good that has some things about it, or a great map. Well, obviously, the great map is the thing you want, but the map that’s something is way better than the map that’s nothing. Plus, as you explore, because of your map, you can start to fill in the details.

LH: You start to learn, and you start to overcome stuff, and you start to master skills on your journey.

JP: Yeah, that’s the other thing, too: let’s say you aim at something, and you develop some skills along the way, and then you get, like, a third of the way there, and you think, "oh, that’s not for me." It’s like, "well, yeah, fair enough, but now you’ve still got the skills you developed. You know exactly why it’s not for you, now, instead of vaguely."

LH: So you’re not thinking of going after that.

JP: Exactly, exactly. And you have the rationale, and then you can bring that wisdom back. Even though it’s not perfect, you can bring it back to your next plan.

LH: Take responsibility for the next step.

JP: Yes, yes. So as you plan, you get better at planning, which is the crucial thing. So then we say to people, "take your positive vision and make it into eight statable goals, and then rank them in a hierarchy, because you need to know…"

LH: A top goal and incremental goals.

JP: Well, that’s the other thing: break the goals into incremental goals, so that you have a reasonable probability of succeeding. What you want to do—this is also what you want to do with a kid. You don’t tell your kid, "here’s an impossible thing. Why don’t you go out and fail?" You say, "here’s something worth going after. Here’s a step you could take that would push you beyond where you are, but that you also have a reasonably high probability of succeeding at." They call that…

LH: Within a timeframe.

JP: Within some timeframe. That’s the other thing: you have parameterize it with regards to timeframe. That’s right. That puts you in the zone of proximal development, and that’s a concept that was generated by a guy named Vygotsky. He was a Russian developmental psychologist, and a smart one. That’s where the idea of "the zone" comes from, to be in "the zone." And, when you’re in "the zone," you’re expanding your skills in a manner that’s intrinsically rewarding, because you’re succeeding. And so you want to set—if you’re ever good to yourself, you think, "OK, I need to set a goal, but I need to set a goal that someone as stupid and useless as me could probably attain, if they put some effort into it." Then you’ve got it perfectly, because it’s not so high that it’s grandiose or impossible, that you fail necessarily and then justify your bitterness. That happens to people.

LH: It happens all the time. You see this all the time.

JP: Yes, exactly: "well, I set a goal, and I didn’t attain it, so I’m not going to set any more goals." It’s like, "no, you set a goal that was inappropriate."

LH: For the timeframe.

JP: That’s right: "you didn’t calibrate it properly, and you’re playing a trick on yourself, because you wanted to fail, so that you could justify not having to try."

LH: Being a victim. Yeah.

JP: It’s not helpful. You’re still going to be a victim. There’s no way out of that, man.

LH: Yeah. Hah.

JP: Because life is a challenge that, in some sense, can’t be surmounted. So there’s no way out of your problem, but there’s certainly proper ways of dealing with it.

LH: So there’s eight steps, right?

JP: Yeah. Lay them out, and the next thing is, "OK, you need a rationale for them, because you’re going to have doubts, and other people are going to put up obstacles."

LH: Does rationale mean meaning?

JP: Yeah, a justification. It’s like, "OK, so what sort of justification is a good justification for your goals?" It’s easy: "why would it be good for you? why would it be good for your family, if you attained that goal? why would it be good for the broader community?" Because if it’s a good goal, it should be good for you—that’s fine. But if it’s a really good goal, it should be good for you in a way that’s good for other people.

LH: Win, win, win.

JP: Yes, exactly. If you’re going to decide what your goals are, why not set up the ones that benefit the largest number of people simultaneously? If you can do that, you should start with your own concerns, because you have to take care of yourself.

LH: Basic needs first.

JP: Yes. Put your oxygen mask on, then put your child’s oxygen mask on. And then, as you build up the basis of competence locally, you might develop enough skills so that you can expand that outward. It also gives your goal a certain amount of nobility. So, if someone challenges you, and says, "why are you doing that? That seems stupid." You could say, "I’m doing that because it helps me take care of myself, but it benefits my family, and here’s the reasons why, and this is the repercussions out into the broader community." People who are putting up objections and doubts aren’t armed to deal with that kind of response. And then when you have those doubts in your mind that plague you…

LH: Go back to your reasons, your "why."

JP: That’s right: "Why am I doing this? Oh, yeah—I have to take care of myself, because otherwise I’m pathetic and useless and bitter and cruel, and then I’m going somewhere terrible, so that’s a bad idea, and here’s how it would help my family, and here’s how it would help the community, and that’s a good enough set of reasons for me, unless I can think of better ones. Without better ones, that’s good enough."

LH: I think the question comes back to—someone can go down the rabbit hole: "why? why am I doing this? why is this meaningful for me?" I think a lot of people go back to, "why am I here in the first place?"

JP: Yes, yes.

LH: "Why am I here? What is the meaning of my life? And is this real, or is this just some dream world?"

JP: Well, and people do go back to that.

LH: And then they get stuck on that: "none of this even matters, because why am I even here?"

JP: The thing is that that’s a self-defeating set of propositions, in some sense. The consequence of being stuck there—the reason you’re stuck there to begin with is you’re not very happy about the fact that life is intrinsically tied up with suffering, because you wouldn’t be asking that question to begin with. If you let that pull you in and take you down, all it does is make suffering worse.

LH: Absolutely.

JP: Not helpful. And then the cascade that we talked about happens: you suffer stupidly and pointlessly, you get bitter, you get cruel, you make everything worse. It’s like, "that’s your answer, is it? You’re going to make everything worse? It’s bad enough. You’re going to make it worse?" Mostly, people won’t do that consciously. So you think, "well, what’s the alternative?" Well, here’s one: if you have a sufficiently noble purpose, the suffering will justify itself. I think that’s empirically testable, and I do believe it’s the case, because I’ve watched people do very difficult things, like people who work in palliative care wards. So all they’re ever dealing with is pain and death, and they can do it. They get up in the morning, they go to work, and they take care of those people, and they lose people on a weekly basis, and yet, they can do it. What that shows is that, if you turn around and confront the suffering voluntarily, you find out that you are way tougher than you think.

It’s not that life is better than you think. Life is as harsh as you think. It might even be worse. But you are way tougher than you think, if you turn around and confront it. And so then, what you discover is that there is a spirit within you that can pursue something meaningful, that has the resilience and the strength to contend properly with the catastrophe of existence, without becoming bitter. I would say that’s one of the central themes of 12 Rules for Life: "make no mistake about it: the first noble truth of Buddhism: “life is suffering.” This is true, and it’s worse than that, because it’s suffering contaminated by malevolence. That’s the baseline." So that’s very pessimistic. But the optimistic part is that you are so damn tough that you can not only deal with that, you can improve it. It’s like, "hm! Oh, well, that’s a horrible situation, but it turns out that I’m armed for the task." That’s a great thing for people to know. I think the fact we’re armed for the task is even more true than the fact that life is catastrophe contaminated by malevolence. We’re stronger than things are terrible, and things are pretty terrible, so that means we’re pretty damn strong.

LH: Wow.

JP: Yes. It’s a very good thing to know, and it’s not naive optimism. It’s a very different thing. It’s like, "no, things aren’t terrible: they’re brutal, and you are so damn tough you can’t believe it."



Dr. Jordan Peterson: Good to see you.

LH: I’m very excited about this. You’ve got a book out called 12 Rules for Life. Make sure you guys check this out. You probably already got it. If you don’t, I’m telling you, go pick it up right now. An Antidote to Chaos. What’s been the biggest challenge in your life that you had to overcome, or the biggest suffering that took you the longest to get beyond, to improve?

JP: Oh, I think that was probably—I wrote about this in the last chapter of my book, which is called, "pet a cat when you encounter one on the street." You think, "what’s the worst thing that can happen to you?" Well, I think the worst thing is that you do something really horrible, and you screw up your life and everyone’s life around you. That’s bad.

LH: You have to live with it.

JP: Yes, yes. You have to live with knowing you did it. That’s rough, man. That’s sin.

LH: It’s worse than dying, because then you don’t remember it.

JP: Right, there are worse things than dying.

LH: Yes, there are.

JP: That’s a bad thing, but I think the hardest existential situation that I’ve been in was the situation with my daughter. She was very, very ill. She had arthritis, 40 effected joints. It started to bother her when she was two, but, really, manifested itself fully when she was six. Some of the medical treatment helped, but, when she was 14-through-16, first her hip disintegrated, and so she had that replaced, after walking around on it for like a good year. And then her ankle disintegrated on her other foot, and she had to have it replaced. And so there were two years of absolutely brutal pain for her—like brutal, daily, excruciating pain. We were really running around, trying to figure out what to do about it. The hip wasn’t too hard to replace, because surgeons are actually pretty good at hip replacements. But ankles are still touch-and-go. Watching what it was doing to her… because she was in enough pain… At one point, it just about broke her. I mean, you’ve probably been in a situation where you were in pain for a night, and you couldn’t sleep. It’s like, "yeah, fine. So multiply that by five and extend it over two years." Jesus Christ. She was on, like, huge doses of opiates. So that was sedating her, so that made her look drunk in public. She could only stay awake about six hours a day, and she had to take Ritalin to stay awake, because otherwise she was just sleeping all the time. It was a very bad autoimmune condition, and so it wasn’t only manifest in the joint deterioration and the pain, because arthritis is also very painful, and 40 joints happens to be quite a lot.

LH: Just one joint…

JP: Yeah, right. It was absolutely brutal beyond belief.

LH: As a father or parent, how do you navigate that emotionally, yourself?

JP: Yeah, well, that’s what that chapter’s about. So what do you do when things are too much? Well, one of the answers is, you narrow your timeframe. Another answer is, you look for occasions of grace and beauty where you can get them. She had a dog. That really helped. So that was something that was with her all the time. We tried to put things in her life that she could care for. She had a whole raft of pets, although she was allergic to almost everything, so most of them were lizards. It’s like, "oh, here’s a guinea pig!" "Oh, I love this guinea pig!"

LH: And then pain.

JP: And then, three hours later, she’d have a big rash, and we’d have to take the guinea pig to the pet store.

LH: Oh, God.

JP: So the dog, luckily, she could tolerate. So we had the dog for her. But one of the things you do when you’re in a situation like that, and it’s just a bloody ongoing nightmare, is that you shrink your timeframe. "What are we going to do in a year?" It’s like, "Oh, god. I can’t even think about that."

LH: But tomorrow, in a week…

JP: Yeah—a week, tomorrow, today, the next hour… Yeah, so that’s what we had to do.

LH: Really shrink your timeframe.

JP: You shrink your timeframe until you can tolerate it.

LH: So you’re not planning out in years.

JP: You can’t.

LH: Because then you’ll go crazy.

JP: Yeah, there’s too much uncertainty. You think, "OK, how can I make the next hour the least amount of awful possible?" That’s what you do at someone’s death bed. You shrink your timeframe, and that’s what you have to do.

LH: How does that play into the Self Authoring Program? If you have this vision for yourself, and you’re mapping out a year, 2, 3, 4, 5 ahead…

JP: Yeah, well, sometimes you have to…

LH: You have to re-navigate.

JP: That’s right. You have to re-navigate, because even the best laid plans of mice and men go astray. That’s part of being alive. And so you have your map, but, you know, if you get a flat tire along the way, you still have to stop and fix your car. Maybe the bloody thing bursts into flames, and you have to get a new car. Your ascent towards your goals can be punctuated by unexpected catastrophe. Well, then, hopefully, you’ve made yourself into a resilient person at that point, and the catastrophe is no worse than it has to be, and you’re not making it worse.

JP: One of the things we were fortunate about is that, by the time she got really ill, my relationship with my wife was pretty well put-together, and my relationship with my son, who’s younger than her, was also well put-together. And so he was an absolute trooper, man. For a lot of his teenaged life, in particular, there was a huge amount of focus on the suffering of his sister. And we were like right up to here with that. It was enough. And he conducted himself admirably. If he caused trouble, we didn’t know about it. He kept it to himself. I don’t mean he was hiding. I mean he dealt with it, and he spent a lot of time at home, and he didn’t do any unnecessary stupid things, and he put up with his sister and his parents, who were on edge a lot, without adding additional catastrophe and misery and grief to it. And when she was a little bit crazy and was leaning on him too hard or bothering him, he was there to support her, and it was massively helpful. My wife and I weren’t any more crazy towards each other than we had to be, and so there wasn’t any additional stress during those periods of time. It would have sunk us.

LH: Any extra would have been, like, "I’m done."

JP: That’s right. That’s right.

LH: How were you able to compartmentalize or just focus on your career at that time—lecturing or writing or whatever it may be at the time?

JP: Well, that’s also part of the vision of hell. It’s like, "well, what’s the alternative? You let things go, and you make them worse?"

LH: Yeah, not showing up makes it worse.

JP: No, there’s no excuse for that.

LH: Was there a compartmentalizing of, like, "OK, it’s 9 o’clock or 8 o’clock in the morning. I’m going to work…"

JP: Yeah, well, we made rules, and we talked about some of them. Some of the rules were—we didn’t talk about my daughter’s illness after 8 o’clock at night. That was a rule. It’s like, "no."

LH: For your sanity.

JP: Well, it’s a war. You wear yourself out in a week, you’re dead, and everyone suffers a lot. So you got to keep going through, however long it’s going to be. What do you have to do? Well, you have to sleep. You have to sleep, or things are going to go badly.

LH: Stop talking and sleep.

JP: That’s right. Stop talking and go to sleep. Yeah, so you have to.

LH: Time to cut off.

JP: Yeah, and I had learned some of that, because I’d been a clinical psychologist for a long time, and so I’d been dealing with people’s problems. You think, "well, how can you go home when you have all those problems to contend with?" It’s like, "they’re not ‘your’ problems."

LH: And they’re not going away right now.

JP: No, and they’re not going away. Having them bring you down is not helping the person who has the problem—the same with my daughter. Had my wife and I deteriorated as consequence of her condition, that would have been horrible for her, because then she would have had to bear the weight of watching her illness destroy her family, right?

LH: And have that guilt.

JP: Oh, Christ, yes. That’s one of the terrible things about having a very bad illness, is that, not only does it do you in, but you can see it taking its toll on the people around you. I think that might even be worse. I mean, this is gradations of hell, but still… So you also can’t allow that to happen. If you have a loved person around you and they’re ill, you have the moral obligation not to let it tear you down, because then it’s on them. That’s no good. And you think, "well, how can you remain healthy and strong in the face of the terrible suffering of someone who’s close to you?"

LH: "Well, do you want us both to suffer?"

JP: That’s it. The alternative is worse.

LH: "Do you want me to get sick and overweight, and not be able to take care of you or me?"

JP: Right, and then we both drown faster. Not helpful.

LH: Did she ever go through a place… I guess some people do this, where kids would have some type of autoimmune or some type of disease or whatever it may be… They were born with it or it happened somehow. It’s not like they ate something themselves… They weren’t necessarily responsible. Was she responsible for causing all the pain in her body, or was it just something that happened?

JP: Well, that’s what we told her: "it’s life, kid. It’s not you." We also told her very, very many times, and we were very careful about this: "do not use your illness as an excuse. As soon as you do that, you can’t tell the difference between the illness and your character. So don’t let it turn you into a victim, even though it’s obviously a catastrophe." We were very clear about that, and that it wasn’t her fault—but that she still had to bear up under it as well as possible, and to do everything she could, and not use it as an excuse. We talked to her about that a lot, and were clear about it. I’ve seen this—this is one of the things I really dislike about what the universities are doing with disability. It’s like, "everybody gets a disability!" And no wonder, because people have hard lives. It’s very rare to find someone who isn’t suffering under an undo load of some sort—there’s something wrong with them…

LH: Oh, yeah. Depression, anxiety, whatever.

JP: Or there’s something wrong in their family that’s serious, or they have terrible economic pressure. There’s something wrong. It’s like, "OK, we should make allowances for you." "Oh, yeah? What allowances? What exactly does that entitle me to?" Well, I tell you, man, that is a murky place you do not want to go, because then you don’t know anymore. It’s like, "well, what’s my responsibility? I have this undo burden to bear. Well, how does that mitigate my responsibility?" The answer is, "as little as possible. You don’t go there, because you get confused, and as soon as you get confused, the illness has not only got you physiologically, it’s got you psychologically. And then you’re in deep trouble." To her great credit, as far as I can tell… I wouldn’t say she never used her illness as an excuse, because "never" is a lot, or "never" is an extreme. But she certainly withstood the temptation to do it habitually, and to warp her character as a consequence.

She did figure out what was wrong with her, and fixed it. And so now she doesn’t have any of these—she’s healthy now. Well, she still has some residual damage from everything that happened. I just found out yesterday—she went to Chicago to have her ankle checked out, because it isn’t working very well. They told her she had to have the old replacement taken out and the new one put in. But, in her realm of catastrophe, that actually constitutes news that’s not as bad as it could be, strangely enough. So it’s not like she’s out of the woods, but…

LH: You taught her from an early age that, even though she had a physical disability, she wasn’t as able-bodied, physically, as a majority of people. You told her, "never allow that to give you special privileges."

JP: Well, no, it wasn’t that, exactly. It was, "never use that as an excuse to not do something you could do."

LH: That’s the challenge.

JP: Yes, because there’s a deception element, there. It’s like, "I don’t want to do that, and I have this illness…"

LH: "So I can get away with it."

JP: That’s right. Don’t use your illness as a means of getting away with something, because you’ll blur the line.

LH: You’ll constantly use that, for the rest of your life.

JP: Right. If you do that 100 times, you’ll be so confused about what’s illness and what’s not that you’ll not know. You won’t know anymore, and maybe you won’t be able to figure it out again. And then you’re in a very bad place. There were some things that she had to have done that were allowances. When she was doing exams, she had to type, because she couldn’t write, and she couldn’t sit on the floor crosslegged, so she had to sit in a chair. So things she actually couldn’t do.

LH: But she still did the work. She didn’t say, "oh, I can’t take the test. I can’t do the exam, at all." She was able to do it with different circumstances.

JP: Yes, right. And the consequence of that was, once she figured out that most of what was bothering—all of it, by the look of it—was a consequence of a set of extreme sensitivities to almost every sort of food. So she hardly eats anything now. The only thing she eats is beef. Beef, salt, water. That’s it. Nothing else. And she’s been eating that way for—well, mostly for almost three years, but almost completely for a year.

LH: And she feels fine?

JP: She’s 100 per cent. She has no symptoms.

LH: No vegetables, no supplements?

JP: No, that’s it: beef, salt. I’m serious. She never cheats. Never.

LH: Wow—because she doesn’t want to feel pain and suffering.

JP: Well, if she eats the wrong thing, she has a catastrophic emotional and physical reaction for a month.

LH: Wow. She essentially limited all food and tried one thing at a time until…

JP: Yes. It took about three years to figure it out. So, yes: "wow" is right. It’s absolutely beyond comprehension. It’s a diet that I follow almost entirely now.

LH: Just beef, salt, and water.

JP: Yes. I’ve been eating that way for about three months, and I’ve been on an extremely low carb diet for about two and a half years. Something like that. Both my wife and I have autoimmune symptoms, and she got all of them.

LH: Your daughter. She got the worst of both, magnified by a thousand.

JP: That’s right. But when she sorted out what was wrong, she convinced me to also try what she was doing. It’s been extraordinarily helpful for me, too. Who would have guessed it? So, anyways, what you do when things are too much for you, is you narrow your timeframe—also in chapter 12, there’s a fair bit of discussion in there about fragility and vulnerability, which is really what you confront when you have a sick kid. It’s like, "oh, my God. How can the world be constituted so that a child can unfairly suffer in this manner?" It’s like, "OK, here’s a way of thinking about it: take away everything from your child that makes them vulnerable." Let’s say I have a three year old. Well, three year olds are kind of cute. They run around, they’re little, and they’re vulnerable, obviously. But that makes them cute and attractive and lovable: all of the vulnerability that’s built into that. Well, you remove that one by one. Well, they’re 8 feet tall now, and they’re made out of steel, and their parts are replaceable, and they have an artificial intelligence brain. You replace them—obviously this is hypothetical—with a superhuman robot that doesn’t die. It’s like, "fine, but where’s the three year old?"

One of the things I thought about when I was writing was, when you love someone—well, especially when you love someone, you love them not only despite their fragility, but also because of it. And so then that’s the price you pay for it. It’s like, "well, they wouldn’t be who they were if they weren’t fragile and limited in their particular way, and the fact that you like to have them around." You think, "oh, well, I guess you think that fragility and vulnerability is justifiable: then you can’t allow that existence to make you bitter, because you can’t have it both ways: you can’t have them being vulnerable and cute and interesting and small and needing care but striving to develop and grow—you can’t have that without them also being prone to pain and destruction and vulnerability. Take your choice." And then what do you do? Teach them to be strong. That’s what you do. You don’t get rid of the vulnerability. You teach them to be strong. That’s also a theme that runs through the book, in many many ways. You don’t protect your children. In fact, you do the opposite. You expose them to the world as much as you possibly can, and you make them strong. That’s the best antidote to their vulnerability—not to protect them. There’s no protecting people. We already established that. Life’s a fatal game. There’s no protecting people. But you can definitely make them strong, and maybe you can make them strong enough to transcend that. That’s the goal, man.

LH: Is there anything that you wish you would have done differently with your daughter or your son that you didn’t do?

JP: Not of any great significance. I mean, I have wishes, I suppose, from time to time, that things could have been different. I spent less time on the positive aspects of my son and my daughter, because we were contending with catastrophe so frequently. Both my kids have a variety of interesting talents, and it would have been better, perhaps, to have had the time to develop those more thoroughly, but… My son, he… Well, I wouldn’t say he didn’t get as much attention as he needed. He didn’t get as much attention as I would have liked to have paid him. But, by the same token, it isn’t obvious that it’s been bad for him, because it required him from a very early age to grow the hell up.

We relied on him right from the time he was a young kid to make intelligent decisions. We assumed he would make intelligent decisions. He was consulted with regards to decisions. It also made him into someone who is very self-sufficient and capable of taking care of himself. It might have been nicer for me, I suppose, to have spent more time with him, but he lives down the street from me now, and I spend time with him, and we have a great relationship, and he has a very good relationship with his sister. And so it turned out as well as it could have. But that didn’t mean that those years in there… They were brutal. There were some brutal times, man. One night in particular, she was in absolutely agony, and I couldn’t get it under control, and I could see—because I am a clinician, I thought, "god damn it. I’m going to end up taking her to CAMH"—that’s the psychiatric hospital—"because it looks like it’s going to break her. God damn it."

LH: Wow.

JP: I couldn’t see a way to resolve it. It pushed her right to the brink, but not over. And there was another episode after she had her hip replaced. She was put in a rehab home hospital for a while, and she was the youngest person in it by like 60 years, and they treated her terribly. It was a terrible place—mean, blind nurses, and very badly run. They traumatized her. The hospital was a worse experience than the damn surgery. And so that took her quite a while to recovery from, but she did recover from it.

LH: Do you ever think, now, since you’re a clinical psychologist and you’ve done all this research and work and study—do you believe that your daughter was meant to experience this, for you to kind of test your ability to be with her? Do you think she would have been able to grow in the way she is now, as someone who didn’t have the practice that you had?

JP: Well, I think it was fortunate for all of us that—well, my wife, too. My wife had worked in palliative care as a volunteer, and she was a massage therapist for a long time. And my wife has a real—she’s a really tough person, and if you don’t need help and you want it, she’ll cut you into ribbons. But if you need help, she will really help you. So she’s really good at differentiating between people who actually need help—in which case she is right there—and people who could stand up on their own. And if you could stand up on your own and you aren’t, you don’t want to be around her, because she will put you in your place. It was so funny, because our kids used to bring their friends over all the time, when they were teenagers, which we actually quite liked. But we had a rule for the teenagers, which was, "we’re really happy you’re here, but if you do something stupid and you never get to come back? That’s actually OK with us." And so they knew that, and it was no joke, because we were happy they were there, and they were welcome. But we were perfectly happy to dispense with them, if they misbehaved. But what was really funny was that the teenagers would come over, and they were pretty afraid of me, to begin with. But after being around for a couple of weeks, they were way more afraid of my wife.

LH: Really? Hah.

JP: Yes, so that was very funny, because she’s quite a pleasant person, and she’s only 5 foot 2—although, she’s imposing enough, because she’s in good physical shape. I’m actually kind of softhearted, and she’s not softhearted—although, she can really take care of people who need to be taken care of. So I think Mikhaila had a fortunate circumstance in that sense, because both of us had a lot of experience dealing with catastrophe. When it came along, we were overwhelmed by it, but it wasn’t because we didn’t know what we were doing. We knew what we were doing; but even though we did know what we were doing, as much as might be possible, that doesn’t mean that we could deal with it, because, well, it took us… What… Seven or eight months to arrange the ankle surgery, and there was a waiting list in Canada, at that point, I think, of three years. Actually, they wanted to fuse her foot, which is a really bad thing for someone young. And so we looked in India, we looked in… Well, Christ, we looked all over the world for ankle surgery—really, everywhere. The government in Canada was actually quite helpful. We found a private clinic in Vancouver that did the surgery, and the Ministry of Health in Ontario was quite helpful to us, at that point. But we were scrambling to… Well, "what should we do? Should we have her ankle replaced? Well, what kind of replacement? Who do we talk to? What about this waiting list? Three years? No; she can’t live, man."

LH: Did you ever doubt yourself in terms of your ability and your research and your studies? Did you every say to yourself, "man, if I can’t figure this out, then all of my work is for nothing?"

JP: Well, no. I never thought it was for nothing, but I certainly doubted whether or not we were going to be able to figure this out.

LH: Really? You’re extremely educated, researched, you’d seen a lot. Did that give you a fear? like, "if I can’t figure this out, no one can?"

JP: Of course, of course. Well, her prognosis was multiple early joint replacements, and that was the good news. The bad news was, "well, how many? and how many can you stand? and when does that kill you?" Her real prognosis was, "plenty of pain with an early death."

LH: Oh, my God.

JP: Well, even now, the surgeon who talked to her yesterday said—he talked to her about the risk of amputation in the future. Well, this is the second joint revision. Maybe this one will last 15 years. We don’t know what the hell’s going to happen. Well, so our response to that is, "that’s 15 years from now."

LH: Deal with it then.

JP: Well, things are better now for how people understand how to replace an ankle than they were—it was 10 years ago that she had this one replaced, and it helped. It wasn’t perfect. Her hip was perfect. The ankle has always been trouble, but way less trouble than it was. And so, well, you struggle forward the best you can. I suppose she could adapt to an amputation that was necessary, but at the moment, that isn’t necessary. But multiple amputations is not really something to be looking forward to when you’re 16. And they were going to put her on corticosteroids to control her inflammation. That would have produced Cushing’s disease, so that makes your face all puffy. It makes you gain weight, and it’s very physically disfiguring, so we decided to not go down that route.

LH: Wow.

JP: Yeah, well, it’s worked out. Thank God. It’s quite the miracle. She had a baby a year ago, and we were never sure that was going to happen.

LH: Wow. Congrats—congrats to you.

JP: Thank you, yes. That’s for sure. So now we have this respite, where she’s healthy. The last time I saw her, she was looking great. She was just glowing. She’s so healthy. I can’t believe it. It’s just beyond belief.

LH: Well, congrats on all the hard work you’ve done to make it a possibility.

JP: Yeah, well, we avoided the worst excesses of hell during the catastrophe, so that’s something. And it did allow her the space to figure out—and my wife had always thought that diet had a relationship to it. We investigated that. There’s a good literature that shows, if you have arthritic symptoms and you stop eating, you fast, they go away. So that’s interesting. It’s like, "well, food must be causing it." "Well, yeah, but once you start eating again, what you eat comes back." It turns out, "no, not ‘no matter what.’" Almost no matter what, because she’s sensitive to virtually everything, but she isn’t sensitive to meat. And so it turns out that, if you eat meat, you can live. So that’s a big difference between being sensitive to everything and not being sensitive to one thing. It’s a harsh diet. It’s made travelling difficult, although I can eat in restaurants, because most restaurants can cook a steak with nothing on it, and that’s made things much easier while I’m travelling. But whatever, it’s working. So thank God for that.

LH: Amazing. Do you think, hypothetically, if your daughter was healthy and never had any of these complications, that you would be the man you are, impacting people, the success, the attention you’ve been getting… Do you think you’d have as much impact?

JP: Well, I wouldn’t have written the 12th chapter. That’s for sure.

LH: Do you think, in general, you’d still be able to have the ideals, belief, the fortitude that you have to reach people and really impact people?

JP: Yeah, I think so. But I know what you’re saying. Your question is, "to what degree is adversity character building?" The answer to that is, "plenty." But I was already—and it was the same with my wife. We weren’t naive people. Because I had an extensive clinical practice, I was dealing with heavy-level adversity, always, 25-hours a week.

LH: It wasn’t your daughter.

JP: No, no. But there were other problems in my family and so forth that I dealt with, as well. We’d already, I think, garnered most of what we could from confronting adverse situations. Now, did that add a different level to it… It probably brought our family closer together, all things considered. I saw the same thing happen when my wife’s mother died. She died of prefrontal dementia. She developed it quite young. It started to really manifest itself in her early 50s, and she died when she was 70. She fell apart over 18 years, and she was very physically healthy. Her husband, who was quite the man about town when he was a young guy—a real extrovert; he was a real character in our home town. He took care of her so well it was absolutely jaw-dropping. Every time she slipped, he’d step up to the plate. He took care of her until he couldn’t lift her out of her chair anymore, and he was getting old, too. So she wasn’t in an old age home for very long. And then we were around when she died, over the couple of days just before her death. Her family—her sister is a palliative care nurse, her other sister is a pharmacist, and Tammy’s had the experiences that I already described, and then her father really stepped up to the plate. So the whole family really gathered around for that, and they acted impeccably throughout it, I would say.

They took care of their mother very carefully while she was dying. They pulled together, and one of the consequences of that, which was so interesting, was that, although their mother died and that was a terrible loss, their bonds that connected them—all of them strengthened, to the point where I would say that was almost compensation for the loss of their mother. So that was really interesting: to see what happens even in a dire circumstance, if people do what they can. Now, I’m not saying that that’s going to work for every situation, because I know people get cut off at the knees, and sometimes you hit a tragedy that, well, it’s fatal. You cannot rectify; it’s a real catastrophe. But it was very interesting, watching that, because they were alert and awake around the deathbed, and they weren’t fighting with each other at all. There was no familial squabbling, because you can imagine that that would happen, because everyone’s stressed. And then you can just imagine how terrible that would make something that’s already awful. There was none of that. They focused their attention on her. They gave her water when she needed it. They washed her, and they made this terrible thing the least amount of awful it could be, and it definitely pulled them together. That whole family, including me, is closer because of what they went through, and also how they went through it. It’s probably the case… Well, I would say it definitely advanced the maturity of my son, because he was—and I told him, "look, kid, you can’t add anything to this. We’re up to here. You have to conduct yourself properly, because otherwise, everything’s going to shake and fall. We can’t have more of this. You can’t bring anything unnecessary into this."

LH: Kid was an all-star, a champion.

JP: It was remarkable. He was only in grade 10 when most of this happened, and your friends are pretty damn important when you’re in grade 10; and he stuck around a lot, to be helpful. So, yeah. It was really good for him, man.

LH: A champion son.

JP: Yeah, he’s a good character. He’s quite something, and he was very helpful to his sister. They had their fights, obviously. She was often unreasonable, and no bloody wonder. Well, when you’re strung out…

LH: You can’t feel anything but pain…

JP: God, she went through so much. Even watching her withdraw from the opiates—because she was on them for a year and a half. She just quit. As soon as she was done her surgery: "I’m not taking these anymore." She had formication, which is the sensation of ants crawling under your skin.

LH: Oh, my God.

JP: She had that for like a month. Oh, God… Unbelievable. She just sailed through it. Like, "I’m done with these."

LH: Wow.

JP: Yeah.

LH: You guys have been through a lot.

JP: Yeah, it was a lot, man.

LH: What’s your biggest fear now, going forward, in your own life?

JP: Oh, making a mistake, at the moment. I’ve been the subject of so much public attention in the last two years, and I’ve been in this situation where, well, even things I didn’t say have also, almost, been fatal, because people take them out of context. But my biggest fear has been that I do something careless, and that there are serious cascading consequences to it.

LH: Do you feel like you’ve done something careless?

JP: Well, everyone’s done something careless. But I’ve been pretty careful. I was fortunate—so, when this political scandal blew up around me in Canada, when I opposed legislation that I thought was reprehensibly constructed, the radicals on the left, in particular, came after me hard. But I was fortunate because—they called me every name under the book and went after my character. And, you know, I suppose there was some degree of… That was understandable, to some degree, because if you stand up against the radical right, well, maybe you’re a communist. Probably not, because you don’t have to be a communist to not like the radical right. But if you stand up against he radical left, well, maybe you’re a Nazi. Probably not, but you might be. So it’s certainly in the interest of the people who are proponents of the philosophy of the radical left to assume that you’re a Nazi, because then they don’t have to deal with you. And so that’s what happens: you throw yourself into the fray, people try to localize you, and they do that by saying, "maybe you’re this! Maybe you’re this! Maybe you’re this!" It’s like, "well, yeah—maybe not, too."

I already had 250 hours of lectures up on YouTube at that point; so people could actually go and see what I had said, because virtually every word I’d ever said to students in a professional capacity—not every word, because I didn’t tape every lecture. But I taped multiple years of lectures, and so people went over those with a fine-toothed comb, trying to find out if there’s anything I’d ever said that—and they couldn’t find anything, and that was because I’d been very careful with what I said. Ever since I was about 25, I started paying attention to what I was saying, and trying very hard not to say things that something in me objected to. And, well, that seems to have provided me with a buffer. People came to my website, because they were interested in—well, before the political stuff blew up, I had a million views on YouTube, which isn’t nothing. A million of anything is a lot. But then, when the political scandal started to break, people came for them but stayed for the content. And that’s been really useful.

LH: And fell in love.

JP: Yeah, and it’s not that surprising. Well, you know, because of what you do: there’s a great hunger for information that is practical and useful, and that helps people find meaning in their lives and orient themselves. There’s a great hunger for that. Most of my lectures were derived from solid psychology, some of it experimental, some of it biological, some of it from the domains of neuroscience, a lot of it from great clinicians. It’s not surprising that people find it helpful, because great clinicians were great because they were really helpful. And so to distill that and offer it to people in a digestible form, to have that have a good effect on them, well, that’s what you’d expect. That’s what the whole discipline is about. That’s been great. These public lectures that I’ve been doing—I think I’ve done 50 of them in about 45 different cities, now, in about three months. The average theater size is between 2,500 and 3,000 people, and they’re unbelievably positive events.

People come there, and we talk mostly about the political spectrum, and why there’s room for voices on the left and why there’s room for voices on the right, and where the parameters of that should be—because both of those can descend into extremism, and that’s not good—and the role of individual responsibility and individual sovereignty, and the necessity for people to develop a vision—the sorts of things that we already talked about. Virtually everyone that’s coming there, they’re not coming for political reasons, even though that’s the story you hear from the more ideologically possessed journalist types: because they see the world that way, they couldn’t imagine anything else could possibly be happening. But the people who are coming to these lectures are coming because they’re doing everything they possibly can to make their lives better, and it’s lovely to talk to people like that.

LH: It’s amazing.

JP: It is. It’s great. It’s literally great.

LH: The School of Greatness, baby.

JP: Right, exactly! Exactly.

LH: I’ve got six minutes. To be mindful of your time and your schedule, and I want to ask you three final questions, if that’s OK.

JP: Yeah, you bet.

LH: As much as I would love for you to go on for another few hours with some of these answers, so I can get to the last question…

JP: I’ll do my best to be brief.

LH: I wish I could go on longer, so we’ll have to have you back the next time you’re in L.A. The first one is, what is your purpose now, moving forward? Through everything you’ve had in your life, what’s your purpose moving forward?

JP: Well, I’m… What’s my purpose… What am I aiming at… Well, I did a series of biblical lectures last year. I did 15 lectures on Genesis. I’m going to continue doing that. In November, I’m going to start with the Exodus stories. What I’d like to do over the next 15 years is make my way through the whole corpus of biblical writings, so that’s one major goal. I want to write another book. I’ve written half of it already, which will be a followup to 12 Rules, because I had actually laid out on a site called Quora 40 rules. And so I’ll do that, and write another couple of books, I suspect, over the next few years. The touring, I’m going to continue. I have 10 cities coming up in Canada, and another 20 in the US, and then 12 in Europe. I’m going to go to Australia in February, and then back to Europe, I think, in April. So there’s lots of touring on the horizon.

It’s for the reasons I’ve already described. The lectures differ every night, although there’s themes that constantly emerge; and I’m using those as an opportunity to have a detailed and engaged discussion with the audience about how we might proceed forward, individually and collectively, so that we can make things consciously better, and why that’s associated with necessary meaning, and why that’s a moral obligation. So it’s a dialog about responsibilities, and not rights. Rights are only important insofar as they set up the space for you to shoulder your proper responsibility. As a sovereign citizen, you have the responsibility for the integrity of the state resting on your shoulders. It’s something that, if you don’t take seriously, then the state shakes, and that’s not good. So I’m trying to convey that to people. It’s like, "there’s actually something that you need to do. You need to take care of yourself; you need to take care of your family; you need to take care of your community; and, if you don’t do that, there will be hell to pay; and it’s on each of us."

It’s hard for people to grasp that. Well, they don’t want to, first of all—maybe because they don’t want the responsibility. Then they don’t get any meaning, then they suffer, then they get bitter. That’s not good. So it’s like, "which of these are you going to pick?" But it’s also salutary to people, because it’s useful for everyone to know that, if you don’t live up to your potential, you leave a hole in the fabric of Being, and it’s filled by something approximating hell. And, unless that’s what you want, then you shouldn’t be doing it. It’s perfectly possible to have a serious discussion with 3,000 people about this, and they are right on board with it, all the way. That’s really something amazing to behold. One of the things I’ve realized is, although these new technologies—the technologies you’re using—enable these long-form discussions, it turns out people are smarter than we thought. TV narrowed it. It’s like, "30 seconds! Say your complicated thing in 30 seconds." But you can’t. So we were viewing the population through this narrow window, and everyone looked kind of stupid. It’s like, "now the window’s fully open." It’s like, "oh, look at that! You people like 40-hour Netflix specials that are incredibly complex, and you like 3-hour Joe Rogan discussions that are complicated. You’ll follow the whole thing." It’s like, "oh, good. We’re smarter than we thought. Thank God for that, because we’d better be." So that’s where I’m aiming at in the future.

LH: That’s the purpose. God, I love it. OK, question number two. This is called 12 Rules for Life. Make sure you guys, again, go pick it up. Get it right now. What’s the link…

JP: Oh! SelfAuthoring.com, and I put up a code, which is "GREATNESS". You get 20 per cent off the full suite—two for one, so you can give the suite to your friends, too.

LH: SelfAuthoring.com.

JP: Yup. I would say to everyone, if you’re going to try this exercise, which I would recommend, do it over a few days, and don’t do it perfectly. Just do it. Get it done. Do a bad first draft, which is an important principle in life: a bad first draft is a great thing to have.

LH: That’s good. You’re also on Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, so we’ll link all that stuff up, as well. What’s your main website?

JP: JordanBPeterson.com

LH: Perfect. OK, so make sure you guys get the book, subscribe to everything, get the Self Authoring…

JP: For you university students out there, the Future Authoring Program decreases your probability of dropout—if you’re in a college program, university program—by somewhere between 25 and 50 per cent, especially if you’re kind of aimless. If you’ve already got a plan and you’re implementing it, and you’ve got a good direction, it’s not as helpful, because you’re already halfway there. But if you’re kind of lost, and you do this, it will help you not only establish your goals but stick with them. It really helps. We’ve done three very detailed, published, peer-reviewed studies showing that this really works. And it doesn’t hurt you, either. That’s the other thing.

LH: That’s great. You’ve got the 12 Rules for Life. I’ve got something called the three truths. It’s a question I ask everyone at the end. So we’re going to try to boil this down to three truths for you. Imagine this is your last day. You get to choose the day when you die, as many years away as you want it to be, and you’ve achieved your purpose. Everything you set out, you aimed for—you hit the target. And then you pass away. It’s the last day, it’s a celebration. But, for whatever reason, there’s no more videos of you up online. There’s no more lectures, no more podcasts, no more books. For whatever reason, you have to take them with you. So no one has access to your information, but you get a piece of paper, and you get to write down three things that you know to be true about your life, that you would pass on.

JP: Don’t say things that make you weak. Lift your eyes above the horizon and aim at the highest star that you can contemplate. What’s the third one… Put your family in order. Yeah.

LH: Powerful. Before I ask the final question, I want to acknowledge you for a moment, Jordan, for your incredible wisdom and vulnerability with me. We just met, but I feel very connected to you and your mission and your purpose, and I just appreciate everything you’ve been through as a father and as a husband, for your daughter, for your son, for your wife, to continue to move on in your own dreams, in your pursuit of bettering humanity, while going through all that you’ve gone through. So I really acknowledge everything you’ve been doing, everything that you stand for, and your ability to use your words carefully, to try to make the best impact on people who are listening. So I want to acknowledge you for all that. I hope we get you to come back, sometime, when you’re in L.A., because we could go for another hour or two. The final question is, what’s your definition of greatness?

JP: Well, greatness is what reveals itself when you attempt to carefully articulate and live out what you believe to be true. It just happens, because there isn’t anything more powerful than truth. That’s the antidote to suffering: truth. It’s a strange thing, because you think, "well, yeah. It produces a lot of suffering, too." It’s like, "yeah, in the short term."

LH: Awesome, Jordan. Thank you, sir. I appreciate it.

JP: You bet. Thanks for the invitation and the opportunity. Very nice to meet you.

LH: Good to meet you. Thank you.



Ben Shapiro: I could not be more excited to speak with Jordan Peterson—well, as Jordan knows. Before the show, we talked for an hour about interesting things. We should have caught that on tape. But now we’re actually going to get the chance to do it live. Jordan’s new book, if you haven’t bought it yet—everybody on the planet has bought this book. I was walking through the office today; we didn’t have a copy in the office; the person at the front desk had a copy of your book just sitting on her desk. 12 Rules for Life: An Antidote to Chaos. A fantastic book, obviously topping all the bestseller lists, all over the world. Jordan, thanks so much for joining the show. I really appreciate it.

Dr. Jordan Peterson: Thanks for the invitation.

BS: Obviously your prominence has just blown up in the last year and a half. We were talking before the show about why that is and why there are so many people suddenly very angry about you. I noticed there was an article in Politico suggesting that young, angry white males—you are now their leader. So congratulations.

JP: Oh, yes.

BS: I wanted to ask about that: why do you think that, number one, your profile’s become so big of late? and number two, why do you think it is that so many members of the left are so angry about that? Why are they characterizing people who listen to you as "angry" and "enraged young white men"?

JP: Well, we can look at the characterization to begin with. I think it speaks to the pathology of the radical left, instantly. They’re absolutely incapable of viewing the world except through group identity terms. If someone comes out and disagrees with them, then they have to characterize them by their fundamental group attribute, whatever that happens to be. Maybe it’s gender, because that’s a favourite, or maybe it’s race. So "angry young white man"—there we go: sexist, ageist, and racist all at once. They’re angry, young, white, men. Well, it has to be that way, if you’re going to play the leftist game, because that’s the only way that you can look at the world. It’s strange that they would attempt to make them reprehensible on the grounds of race, age, and sex, since that’s precisely what they stand against, hypothetically. But if you can’t make your enemy reprehensible along some dimension, then you have to contend with them seriously. And so if I’m not an alt-right fascist like Hitler or Milo Yiannopoulos, which was how I was characterized in Canada—because the radical leftists can’t even get their bloody interests straight: "he’s like Hitler or Milo Yiannopoulos." There’s no obvious difference between them, right? It’s just another attempt to pillory, as far as I can tell. I think that it’s dreadful. I really think it is.

There was an article written by, I believe, The New York Review of Books, which was just republished in The Globe and Mail, talking about the emergence of hyper-masculinity, and how I was somehow responsible for that or contributing to it, like Mussolini. I read that and I thought, "ok, so what are you doing? I see: you’re conflating masculinity and hyper-masculinity at the same time. Then you’re virtue signally by being against hyper-masculinity. But really, what you’re trying to do is bring down whatever it is that’s masculinity. And what masculinity is, in this frame, is something like competence." And so it’s part of the radical leftists’ general war on competence as well, which I think is one of the most pernicious elements of the culture wars—the dissolution of hierarchies; the assuming that every hierarchy has to be based on power and serve the needs of your group, whatever that happens to be; that there’s no such thing as competence. And then the other thing that’s reprehensible about it—because that’s not enough—is that it’s just wrong.

I’ve got tens of thousands of letters from people, and people come up to me all the time on the street. I’ll give you an example. This is a great story. This is really touching. So I was in L.A. about a month and a half ago. I was downtown L.A, and downtown L.A. is kind of rough. I was wandering around with my wife, and this young guy pulled a car up beside me and hopped out. He was kind of a stylish looking twenty-one-year-old Latino guy. He was all excited. He asked me who I was, and I told him. That’s what he had presumed, so he was kind of excited about that. He said, "I’ve watched all your lectures, and it’s really helped me. I’ve been straightening out my life and trying to get my room clean"—he laughed about that—"developing some aims and trying to tell the truth. I’ve really fixed up my relationship with my father." Then he said, "wait, wait. Just wait a minute." I thought, "sure." So he went back in the car, and he got his father out of his car, and he came over with his dad. They had their arms around each other. He said, "look, we’ve really improved our relationship," and they’re both smiling away. That’s… Man, if you’re going to target me for that, just go right ahead.

BS: Yeah. It sounds real "white supremacist."

JP: Wherever I go now—and this is the thing that’s so wonderful about all of this, as far as I’m concerned. People come up to me all the time, and that’s exactly what they say: they say, "look, I was lost, aimless, depressed, nihilistic, anxious, drug-addicted, alcoholic, wasting my time, masturbating too much"—although they don’t generally use that particular example. "Lost," essentially, and "hopeless," in some sense. "I’ve been watching your lectures, and they’ve really helped, and I’ve really been putting my life together, and I’ve been trying to say what I believe to be true and develop a vision, and it’s really helped." It’s so overwhelming. If I’m doing book signings after a talk, then there’ll be a dozen people or more who—and I can only talk to people for about fifteen seconds, but you can have a very intense conversation in fifteen seconds. They’ll say, "look, I was suicidal, man. I was really hanging on to the edge of the earth by my fingernails, and I’m better," and they have tears in their eyes.

BS: That’s amazing.

JP: A little of that goes a long way, man.

BS: I think that, when I look at your rise—I talk to people who love what you do. Every time I go on the road, and I’m speaking at a campus, you’re the number one name that gets mentioned by people who come to my lectures. I think the reason for that, that I’ve seen, is really twofold. One of the things that you really talk a lot about is the notion of self-discipline and purpose in your life, and the idea that you are in control of your decision making, and your decision making matters. That’s one. The other is that you have a unique capacity to say "no." When somebody says something to you that’s illogical but popular, you have the capacity to say "no." That’s what happened in the Cathy Newman interview: somebody said something to you that made no sense, and you just said, "no," and then you stood on that "no;" and when you stand on that no, I think it gives people a lot of courage.

JP: Yeah. Well, the gender issue is really an interesting one. One of my professional domains of expertise is individual differences. I’m a personality psychologist, so I know the gender difference literature. It’s a very solid literature. It has a thirty-year history. Once psychologists got the personality model down—so that would be the Big Five model—all empirically derived, straight statistics. Brute force empiricism. Nobody had a theoretical axe to grind with the Big Five, except to say, "maybe there are human traits. Maybe they’re encapsulated in language. We can use statistical techniques to find out what they are." That was it. That was the whole ideology. It’s very neutral, as far as ideologies go.

Five traits emerge. Ok. Are there differences between the sexes? Turns out there are. All right. They’re not massive, although if you sum them across all the traits, you can separate men and women with about seventy-five per cent accuracy, so it’s not trivial, but you have to sum across all the traits. Then another question comes up: "well, are those differences sociocultural or biological?" "Ok. We can test that. We’ll go around the world; we’ll look at cultures; we’ll rank order them in terms of the gender equality of their sociological policies. We can do that with broad agreement from the right and the left. Then the hypothesis would be, ‘if gender differences decrease among more egalitarian societies, then the gender differences are sociocultural—or at least more sociocultural.’" That’s exactly the opposite of what was found, repeatedly. "That’s pseudoscience." "No. That’s mainstream psychology." Those papers have thousands of citations. The average humanities paper has zero citations, right? And then the next most common one has one. Three thousand? That’s an unbelievable classic.

Here’s the other bit of proof. You say, "well, how do you know you can trust someone’s judgement about a fact?" "The fact emerges despite their ideological presuppositions." It’s well known that the social sciences and the humanities have a left tilt. A lot of that’s temperamental. The tilt has become more pronounced. But as Jonathan Haidt has pointed out, there are no conservatives among social personality psychologists, or none to speak of. Very few—vanishingly few. And if the field has a bias, it is definitely and indisputably a left-wing bias. Ok, so you have to fight that, if you’re a scientists. Even if you’re a left-wing scientist, you have to fight that, because you want to get to the facts. It was these social scientists who generated the data that suggested that the gender differences not only were real, but that they were bigger in egalitarian societies. They didn’t do that to grind their ideological axe, because their ideological presupposition was, "you make the society; men and women get more the same? No, they get more different. Oh! Isn’t that something."

So there’s a corollary there—and they’re still pushing in this direction in Scandinavia. They say, "boys and girls are different. Men and women are different. It looks biological. But, because people are malleable, you could push the sociocultural structure harder and harder to minimize the biological differences." Ok, well, first of all, "maybe, and maybe not. Maybe you get a rebound, and the kids would rebel. That could easily happen." But let’s say, "Ok, you could." The problem with that is that, if you cede that much power to the state—you’re basically giving the state the right to socialize your kids. It's like, really? Really? You really want to do that? I mean, people in Israel couldn’t do that with the kibbutz, right? It didn't work. So people aren’t going to give up their children to the state, and thank God for that.

BS: This was one of the questions we were discussing earlier. We were talking about the polarization in politics between right and left. Obviously, you’re a psychologist; you’re a philosopher. But you’ve been dragged—almost kicking and screaming—into this political sphere, because everything has been so politicized. And so when you cite social science statistics, and they’re scientifically based, you’re called a racist; you’re called a sexist; you’re called a homophobe.

JP: I’m called Milo Yiannopoulos.

BS: Exactly. So why do you think it is that so many folks on the left purport to be all about reason and science and objective fact but are so willing to throw those out the window the minute that it becomes politically inconvenient for them?

JP: Well, imagine that cognitive systems—an interpretation of the world—has levels. There are axiomatic levels. Some fundamental presuppositions are more fundamental than others. You could say, "well, the leftists, historically—maybe because of their atheistic rationality—are more on the side of science than, say, the fundamentalists of any sort." But when push comes to shove, you find out how the axioms are nested. There’s deeper axioms underneath that, which is that all hierarchies are based on power, and all power plays are based on group identity—tribal identity, essentially—and that the entire history of the world is nothing but a power play between these different identity groups. It’s like, "ok, well, if the science indicates that some of that’s wrong, then you alter those beliefs? or do you alter the science?" The answer to that question is, "well, it depends on how you’ve hierarchically arranged those." If the scientific facts are the axiomatic substructure, then you alter your beliefs. If your beliefs are the axiomatic substructure, then you alter the science. Well, we’ve seen how that plays out.

One of the things I’ve tried to do, so to speak, is to diagnose the axiomatic structure. It’s like, "ok, what’s the metaphysical presumption structure of the radical left?" Well, what it is, is that you’re basically your group; your groups are basically engaged in warfare; and the warfare is arbitrary, except insofar as it serves your group. I don’t buy any of that. I think that’s a route to certain disaster. I think it’s a degeneration into tribalism, and that we will seriously pay for it. Not only because it returns us to tribalism, and tribes fight. The anthropological evidence for that is overwhelming. Tribes fight. It doesn’t even matter if they’re chimpanzee tribes: even chimpanzee tribes fight. So not only do you regress to a tribalism, but you also invalidate the one proposition that’s been able to help us arise above the tribal, which is the idea that the individual should be sovereign. And so I think the culture war is about "what’s the proper framework within which to view human identity?" and "what’s the relationship between the individual and the group, in relationship to that identity?" The leftist answer is, "it’s all group, and it’s all power." It’s like, "ok…."

BS: One of the things that we’ve been talking about, obviously, is the big gap—that I think we certainly agree on—between the collectivists identity politics and the sublimation of science in favor of politics that favours a power group. But I want to talk a little about the division that is also now breaking out among those of us who I think would consider ourselves friends of the enlightenment. So you consider yourself a friend of enlightenment-style thinking, at least in the essence that individuality matters, and that the individual is sovereign.

JP: And the scientific method is useful, and that facts are useful and real.

BS: I consider myself as part of this group. People have started to call it the "Intellectual Dark Web." Sam Harris is part of this group. There are a wide variety of folks with a lot of broad political differences that are part of this group. But there are some real differences that have broken out, even among people who consider themselves part of this group. Steven Pinker has a different perspective on the world than you do. I have a different perspective as Sam Harris. You and I have our differences, probably, on some matters of philosophy. So where do you think the vulnerability lies in the possibility of revivifying enlightenment mentality? It seems, to me, that one of the big problems that’s popping its head up above the water now is the rejection of the enlightenment in favor of this old-style tribalism that you’ve been talking about—that we’re now going to repeat history, because we benefitted so much from the enlightenment that we’ve forgotten that things don’t have to be this way. We’ve got so much nice stuff and so much freedom that we forget that, if we just toss those enlightenment ideals out the window, things get really ugly again. I think that’s what unites.

JP: Well, that’s the question: "what do you toss out the window before things get ugly?"

BS: Right.

JP: The enlightenment proponents—you could say Harris; you could say Pinker; Charles Taylor, in Canada. They trace back the development of the modern self, let’s say. Taylor wrote a book called Sources of the Self to the enlightenment. It’s quite interesting, because if you look at the typical academic psychologist, let’s say, their historical knowledge generally runs back about fifteen years, because they’re all concerned with the modern literature. There’s some utility in that, but the downside is that they don’t have any historical context. So you read someone like Taylor, and you think, "wow, he’s stretching it back five hundred years." But there’s reading that goes way beyond that, to look at the sources of the self, and the source of the modern ethos. This is a huge bone of contention between people like me, say, and people like Harris—and I think between people like you and people like Harris.

My sense is that the enlightenment values themselves are grounded in an ethos that’s much deeper and much less articulated. That would be an ethos of metaphor, image, drama, ritual, religion, art, music—all of that. Dance, even, for that matter. The nonverbal; the pattern recognition. Iain McGilchrist has written a book called The Master and His Emissary, which lays that out quite nicely with regards to hemispheric specialization. It’s kind of predicated on Elkhonon Goldberg’s observation that the left hemisphere is specialized for what we know, and the right hemisphere is specialized for what we don’t know. So that’s an order-chaos dynamic. The rough idea would be that the left hemisphere generates paradigmatic systems. That would be like the enlightenment system, axiom predicated—even statable axiom predicated. But that entire axiomatic system is based in the nonverbal domain, that’s associate with—well, it would be associated with the right hemisphere, but would also be associate with deep, biological motivations and emotions.

Here’s one way of looking at it: You think, "well, how do you validate an axiomatic system of ethics?" The answer is quite straightforward. Jean Piaget figured this out: you play it out in the world. Literally, you act it out in the the world, and then you watch each other’s emotional responses. And if the axiomatic system that you’re playing out satisfies the motivations and the emotions of the people who are engaged in that system, then the system is justified. And then you say, "well, it’s not just that their motivations and emotions are satisfied. It’s more complex. It’s that the motivations and emotions of each individual are satisfied. But not only now, but now, next week, next month, and next year. So you have to extend it across time. And not only my emotions and motivations, but yours as well, now, next week, next month, across time." So there’s terribly tight constraints placed on an axiomatic system’s validity. Now, the way Jean Piaget thought of that—he said, "think about it like a child’s game: a bunch of kids get together, and they decide to play pretend." "Pretend" is, "let’s model the world as a place to act," because to "pretend," you act out, right? So the kids get together, and they assign roles, and they say, "you’re going to be mom; you’re going to be dad; you’re going to be the dog; and we’re going to play house." And they act it out.

What they’re doing is seeing if they can regulate the manner in which they’re constructing the game so that everyone’s emotions and motivations are so well satisfied that they want to continue the game. That's so cool. What it shows you is that that’s how an ethical system is tested and justified: you play it out, and you see if everyone wants to keep playing. That’s a whole different methodology than the scientific domain. So the ethical axiomatic system isn’t justified by reference to the scientific method. It’s justified by reference to the emotional and motivational wellbeing of all the players of the game. This is the second part of this, and this is so cool. Then the question is, "well, how does that game emerge?" The answer is, "the same way that children’s games emerge."

What Piaget noted is that kids would get together, and they’d play marbles. If they were young kids—say, six years old—they could all play marbles. And if they were in a group, they were playing marbles, and it all worked out fine—squabbles and all of that, but the kids would keep playing, validating the game. But if you took the kids out of the game, and you said, "what are the rules of the game?" They would give completely disparate accounts. So they knew how to do it—it was like the wisdom was in the group. The wisdom was fragmented enough among the individuals, so that if you pull the individuals out, you get disparate accounts. But if you put them all together, they could play the game. But then if you waited until they were eleven or twelve, and you pulled them out of the game, then they could tell you the rules. Then, at fourteen or fifteen, they would be willing to—this is with more sophisticated games—regard themselves as makers of the rules.

Ok, so here’s how it happens in an evolutionary sense. People, going all the way back to our primate forebears, organized themselves into functional hierarchies. The hierarchies are complex, and they’re not just based on power, despite what the idiot Marxists say. Even de Waal has noted that chimpanzee hierarchies are unstable, if they’re only based on power. They don’t last. They degenerate into violence. So you have a hierarchy that works, but it’s acted out. No one knows why it works. It works because everyone seems to be happy with it. Ok, and so those hierarchies get more complex and more sophisticated, and then people start to observe them and talk about: "well, we’ve got this hierarchy here. What’s it like?" Then they spin off dramas about the hierarchy: "here’s a hero who climbed up the hierarchy, and here’s what a hero looks like."

Ok, so then you get the idea of hierarchy, and then you get the idea of the hero as the person who moves up the hierarchy and generates. Then, out of that, you get the extraction of the idea of the hero, and then you get development of that idea. Out of that you get the monotheistic religions. So the procedure and the hierarchy come first. No one knows what the rules are. It’s all played out the same way wolves play it out in a pack, or chimpanzees play it out in a troop. Then we wake up and think, "oh, we live in a structure. Here’s the structure." That would be Osiris in the Egyptian mythologies. "Here’s the structure; here’s how the structure goes wrong; here’s what the structure does; here’s its tyrannical aspect; here’s what you have to do to generate the structure and to thrive in it." Ok, that’s even more important. The hierarchy’s important enough, but what we want to know is how to master the hierarchy. That’s where you get the mythologies of the hero. So then it generates all sorts of different heroes, because there are different ways of being successful. Then you have a panoply of heroes. Then you think, "ok, now we’ve got all these heroes. That’s a set. We can pull back and say, ‘ok, something about all these heroes is what makes them heroes.’"

That’s when you extract out the monotheistic saviour. That’s why, in Christianity, Christ is the king of kings. You can think about it as a liberal statement. Forget about the religious overlay. It’s like, "ok, you’ve got a bunch of people. Some of them are kind of [Abel]-like." Ok, so you admire them, for whatever reason that is. It’s not easy to figure out why you admire someone. That’s complicated. But let’s say you’ve got admirable people. You start telling stories about them. That’s why you go to a movie. Do you want to go watch someone you don’t care about, you’re bored by? No, you want to go watch someone admirable and interesting, or maybe the opposite of that. It doesn’t matter; it’s the same thing. And then you think, "ok, we’ve got all these admirable people. They’re generating the world properly. That’s what makes them admirable. There's a principle they embody, and that principle is ‘the process by which the admirable world is generated.’" That's the logos. That's the thing that’s operative at the beginning of time.

BS: So here’s my question about all this—because now we’re really not talking about 12 Rules for Life as much as Maps of Meaning, which is your first book. You’re doing the audio recording of it now. It’s definitely a harder book than 12 Rules for Life, and a much more complex book in a lot of ways. So how universal are these systems? Meaning, why is it that the enlightenment only arrived at one time and one place in human history, as opposed to—if human biology is essentially consistent across humanity, then why is it that, if at the apex of the levels you have the enlightenment idea, which started this particular question, then why is it that it only arrives in one place at one time, as opposed to arriving in variety of places and a variety of different times and cultures?

JP: Ok, that’s a great question. The first thing we would say is, the process by which the hierarchy itself and success within the hierarchy is generated is to be accounted over millions of years; at least hundreds of thousands of years. But I would push it back, because you can see analogs in the chimps. So twenty million years, let’s say. That’s a long time. On that time timescale, the fact that the enlightenment values arose in Europe five hundred years ago, before anyone else—well, who cares? It’s five old men long, right? If you put five one-hundred-year-old men in line, it’s like, it’s yesterday. It’s this morning. So we’ve evolved these hierarchical structures. That’s our culture. We’ve evolved ways of maneuvering within the hierarchical structures that are successful. And now we’ve started to evolve ways of mapping our adaptation. Not just adapting, but mapping it. So how does the mapping occur? First, admiration. Second, imitation of admiration, and that would be drama.

Shakespeare extracts out what’s admirable and interesting and plays it out. So that’s the use of the body as a representational structure of the body. So we act out what’s admirable. You think, "ok, now we’ve got the drama down. We’re all captured by the drama." Well, then the literary critics come along, the philosophers. They say, "oh, what are the principles by which the admirable people operate?" It’s like chimps woke up and said, "oh, some chimps are more successful than others. What are the rules of success?" It’s like, "well, there were no rules, because they weren’t running by rules." There aren’t rules until you describe the patterns. Then you have a rule. That’s what happens with Moses, by the way. Moses has a revelation: "here’s the rules! We’ve been living out those rules forever, but we didn't know what they were, because they weren’t rules; they were customs."

Ok, so you start by mapping your customs in drama and story, and that way you can represent them and you can transmit them. Then, once you have them in your grip, say, they’re represented now, not just acted out. Well, then you can move one step backward from them, and you can say, "well, what's the commonalities among these? What are the general principles?" That would be something like the development of the Code of Hammurabi. It’s like, "well, we’ve got all these customs. What are they?" Revelation. It’s like, "oh, here’s how you map the customs." That’s the Decalogue. It’s the same idea. So it took human beings a very long time to evolve their hierarchies, to evolve their structures of success, and then to have enough people around with enough spare time to engage in the artistic cultural process of mapping the adaptive structure. That all emerges in mythology and drama. Then, that lays the groundwork for philosophy. Then the philosophers can come in—especially once it’s written, like in the Judeo-Christian pantheon. It’s like, "oh, now we’ve got it written down. Oh, well, we don’t have to remember it. We can read it. And while we’re reading, we can think about it." And so then, out of that, starts to come the semantic codes. Well, then you get the enlightenment. "Oh, here’s a bunch of semantic codes." It’s like, "yeah, yeah. That’s great."

BS: This is really interesting because, if you read Pinker or Goldberg’s new book, essentially, they attribute the enlightenment to—Goldberg calls it a "miracle." It’s almost as though it accidentally occurred in a certain place at a certain time. Goldberg doesn’t quite go that far, I think, to be fair to him. But I think that philosophy that sprang up randomly here is very much embedded in a lot of Sam Harris’ thinking, a lot of atheist thinking. You’re taking it further back, but I do wonder if this—this may be an area of actual disagreement between us, which would be fun. Are you attributing the growth of the Judeo-Christian ethic that emerges into the enlightenment as accidentally, or just pushing the timeline further back?

JP: No, I don’t think it’s accidental.

BS: Ok.

JP: I’m not making a reductionist argument. The first thing I’m going to say is, "this is how religion evolved." But I’m not saying that this explanation exhausts the phenomena, because it’s a very strange phenomena. It’s very, very strange. But that doesn’t mean we can’t generate a plausible evolutionary count. If you have a bunch of motivated emotional, limited beings occupying the same territory and competing and cooperating for the same resources, including the resource of cooperation, which can generate more resources—it’s not a zero-sum game—there are going to be patterns of adaptation that emerge from that, that are similar. So here’s a way of thinking about it: if you put a bunch of kids together, they’re going to evolve games. "Well, which games?" "Well, a bunch of different games." "Yeah, but they’re all games, right?" So that’s the moral relativist element. A bunch of different games. But the moral absolutist element is, "yeah, yeah, but they’re all games, and the games have to be playable, which means they have to continue in an iterated way."

That’s a big constraint. People have to want to play them. So not only do they have to be games—and comprehensible to everybody and enjoyable—but they have to be self-maintaining, and everyone has to want to play them. Ok, that’s the answer to the postmodern conundrum: A plethora of potential ethical implications of the world; an infinite variety. Fine. Not an infinite variety of pragmatically applicable interpretations. You instantly constrain the universe to… Well, to what? This is why there’s commonalities in mythologies. If you put enough people together in enough different places, the commonality of the groups of people—because of the grounding in common motivation and emotion and embodiment, because we’re embodied—means that they’re going to generate hierarchies that are broadly similar with strategies of success within those hierarchies that are broadly similar with descriptions of the strategies that are broadly similar. And so you could say, in some sense, "the ethic that gave rise to the enlightenment is in place more or less everywhere." Now it’s tricky, because not every hierarchical system is as functional as every other hierarchical system. Some of them can be generated to tyranny. We’re talking about the set of all voluntarily playable games.

BS: Right.

JP: Something like that, and that can degenerate. Out of that, you’re going to get common hero myths. You have to. And then that lays the groundwork for even our ability to communicate.

BS: Right.

JP: The enlightenment guys are not getting that.

BS: This is getting to the broader question. I know you and Sam went on for three hours about the nature of truth, particularly truth in the moral sphere. Would it be fair to say that you guys agree on the idea of truth in the scientific sphere? that there is such a thing as subjective truth?

JP: I would say we agree on a lot of that. The question is, to some degree, "why do scientists accept the idea that objective truth is true?" And then I would say, we probably don’t agree about that, because I would ground that in pragmatism, and Sam would ground that in the idea of an independently existing objective world.

BS: Right, which is a leap of faith more like my own, actually, than the pragmatist view. And if you believe there’s a God who’s out in the universe, who created the structures in a particular certain way, then what he created is the truth, and it is apart from you. If human beings didn’t exist and they weren’t able to utilize the truth, that truth would still exist out there. The pragmatists might say, "truth is in the use that it has for human beings."

JP: Well, that’s the thing. I don’t know if we would consider scientific truth "true" unless we are also simultaneously accepting the idea that scientific truth is good for people. There’s one other thing I wanted to bring up that’s relevant, because you brought up the idea of God. So here’s a way of thinking about it. And I don’t know what to make of this, because this is stretching my thoughts out beyond where I’ve been able to develop them. So this is the intuition that I have, based on a variety of things; experiences I’ve had. Imagine that there’s a very wide range of human behaviours. Some subset of those are both admirable and not admirable, so let’s call them "good" and "evil" at the extremes. Then we might say, "well, there’s a pattern that characterizes all the actions that are good and a pattern that characterizes all the actions that are evil. And that’s a transpersonal pattern, because it’s not just about you or me. It’s about everyone."

Ok, so then that gets personified. That’s Christ and Satan, let’s say, or Cain and Abel. That’s a bad guy and a good guy in a movie. It’s personified all the time. It’s Thor and Loki in the Marvel movies. You take the idea of Christ, and you think, "ok, so that’s the abstraction of everything that’s admirably good about the set of all human behaviours." Ok, then you think, "what sort of reality does that have?" This pulls back into the reality of the idea of the logos, and the idea that it was the logos that God used at the beginning of time to extract order out of chaos. It’s transpersonal, the goodness. It’s not just characteristic of any one person. It’s more like something that inhabits a person, rather than that a person is. You can really see this, for example, on the other end, too—on the Satanic end. If you read the writings of people who do absolutely horrific things, like the shooters, you can see that possession extraordinarily clear, if your eyes are open. It’s shocking, so people don’t usually look at it. They even say that themselves. The Columbine kids, man… Their writings are hair raising. They were clearly possessed by an evil that you only encounter if you sit in a dark place and brood on your hatred for months and years. You go places where all the dark people go.

BS: Right.

JP: And then that takes you over. The good can take you over, as well. Ok, so there’s this spirit of good, let’s say. What the spirit of good does is act in the world, on the potential of the world, to generate the actuality of the world. The Judeo-Christian proposition is, "if you confront the potential of the world with good in mind, using truthful communication, then the order that you extract is good." And then that’s echoed in Genesis, when God is using the Word; and he creates cosmos out of potential, and every time he does that he says, "and it was good." I think it’s so interesting. There’s a proposition, there. The proposition is that, if you encounter potential with truth, the cosmos you create is actually good. Well, that’s just an absolutely overwhelming idea. If it’s true, it’s the greatest idea there ever was.

BS: Your thoughts on this actually, from Maps of Meaning, helped generate what we in Judaism call [inaudible] in Hebrew, believing that a thought about the Bible—but this, merged with a little bit of Aristotelean thought, led me to the idea that, when it comes to the mystical notion of the tree of good and evil in Eden—what is that supposed to be? What did people do wrong? Like eating from the tree of good and evil. My feeling is that, what they did wrong was that God created a universe in which the value was embedded in the object. In the same way that you, in your book, talk about: if you’re teaching a child about the object, the rules of the object are embedded in the teaching about the object. So you use the example of a vase, where you teach a child, "don’t touch the vase, because the vase will break." So the rules are embedded in the object. In the same way, in Aristotelian thought, the rules of behaviour are embedded in the nature of the universe, meaning, what makes a man good is what makes a man unique, which is reason.

The idea is that reason is what makes man unique, so acting in according to right reason is what makes an action good. So if you believe that God created the universe along these lines, and that natural law is just a human attempt to understand the lines along which God created the universe, then where human beings went wrong is when they decided to separate values from the universe—when we decided to take values and say, "this is a completely separate thing. This vase has no rules attached to it anymore. It’s just a vase. We can construct the rules arbitrarily about what to do with this vase." So eating from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil changes the nature of good and evil from "universe comes along with a set of rules" to "human beings think they can use their own intuition to supplant God’s rules and supplant universal rules with their own particular vision of what the universe ought to be." And, at that point, they have to be expelled from Eden.

JP: That’s all associated—to some degree, I would say—with Milton’s warning in Paradise Lost. Milton basically portrays Lucifer—who’s the bringer of light, weirdly enough—as the spirit of unbridled rationality, which accounts for, say, the Catholic church’s antagonism towards rationality. The same idea is in the Tower of Babel, that human beings have a proclivity to erect their own dogmatic, ethical systems, and then to expand them into a grandiosity that challenges the transcendent, and that that’s a totalitarian catastrophe. For Milton, Satan was the spirit that eternally does that, who says, "everything I know is enough; and that supplants what I don’t know. That supplants the transcendent." That’s a catastrophe.

How that’s tangled up with the knowledge of good and evil, well, you’re making some headways towards sorting that out. I mean, there is a cataclysm that’s explained in the story of Adam and Eve, right? The cataclysm is coming to wakefulness. It’s associated partly with recognition of nakedness, which is recognition of vulnerability and mortality and the discovery of death, and also the discovery of good and evil that goes along with that. So you said, "well, that’s partly the cognitive division of ethics from the facts of the object," so I have to think that through. I would also recommend to people—I think I mentioned this before—Iain McGilchrist’s book, The Master and his Emissary, because he looks at this neuropsychologically, and looks at the left hemisphere as the hemisphere that’s dealing with the explicitly axiomatic systems, and the right hemisphere, that’s dealing with what those systems are embodied in. Ok, so part of what happens with the emergence of good and evil, as far as I can tell—it took me a long time to think about this, and this is different than the hypothesis that you laid forward, which is why I can’t reconcile it, exactly.

BS: Yes.

JP: You recognize you’re naked. You know you can be hurt. You know you’re vulnerable and insufficient. You hide from God, because that’s what happens next. God is your destiny, or you’re walking with God is a manifestation of your ultimate proper destiny. You doubt whether you’re capable of that, because now you realize your embodied finitude: your nakedness and insufficiency. So you hide, and you’re ashamed. So there’s that. You also realize that you can be hurt and suffer. That kind of goes along with God’s command that you’re going to work in the sweat of your brow, and you’re going to die, and that women are going to be subjugated to men, which is put on as a curse, not as a moral imperative. But then what emerges out of that is that, as soon as you know that you can be hurt—this is what differentiates us from animals—and you really think that through: "here’s all the myriad ways I can be hurt." Then you’re angry about that, because you could be hurt. But even worse, you could figure out how to hurt other people. So that’s part of that knowledge of good and evil. You associated it with this disassociation of the object from its ethical container.

BS: Right. The universe as it was created by God, from our interpretation of the universe. That there is a gap between the two, and that once human beings begin to supplant their own rationality for a telos, a teleology, what we do is end up creating all these awful systems that end up destroying us in the end.

JP: There’s something about that that’s right. I mean, part of what happens in the New Testament, as far as I can tell, is that what Christ says—he’s trying to transcend the rule structure, right? Not because there’s anything wrong with the rules. They’re a necessary precondition for discipline, which is actually why I wrote "12 Rules." You need rules, but rules conflict, and they don’t always apply, and so there has to be an ethic underlying the rules, and you should have more respect for the ethic than for the rules. Christ’s idea—and this is part of the idea of the reestablishment of the paradise—is that you should orient yourself towards the good, and that’s something like an alliance with God, and then that you should tell the truth. That’s the ethic that generated the rules to begin with. Then we can be serious. We can say, "how do you adjudicate the reality of that claim?" All right, so then we might think—well, we already walked through the fact that the heroes of the past acted on potential to extract out the world of actuality, and if they did that properly, then the world they extracted was good, and that is a divine principle. Then we might say, "well, is it a divine principle?" And you might say, "well, what is it that’s acting through people in the good?"

The Christian theological answer to that would be "the logos." That’s the idea. That’s the idea of the Holy Spirit, roughly speaking. You might think, "well, is that a real thing?" Well, to me, it’s real the same way that consciousness is real. We don’t know the role of consciousness in determining reality. But even if you’re an evolutionary biologist… And this is so interesting, because the evolutionary biologists actually discriminated, differentiated themselves from Darwin on this point. Darwin was very, very forthright in his claim that sexual selection was as powerful as natural selection, or even more so. Because that brought consciousness into the world as an active player, the materialistic evolutionary biologists ignored that for like 150 years and only concentrated on natural selection, where they could play, "well, this is all chance." Sexual selection is not chance. Here’s a hypothesis: Human beings separated themselves from chimpanzees. One of the reasons they did that was because human females are sexually selective. Chimps aren’t. Female chimps in estrus will mate with any chimp. The main chimps, the dominant ones, chase the subordinate ones away. So they’re more likely to have offspring, but it’s not because of female choice.

BS: Right.

JP: Now, human females have done this whole different thing. They have hidden fertility, and they’re much more likely to go after guys who have climbed up the hierarchy, so let’s say "heroes." We’ll give the women some credit for intelligence, right? and say that that’s what they’re after, even if they’re using wealth and status and so forth as a marker. They’re actually using those as a marker for competence, and I think the evidence for that is clear. Ok, so you might say, "oh, well, it was human female conscious choice that selected us." And you think, "ok, that’s not random at all. It’s the farthest thing from random that there is. That means that consciousness is making its choices in regards to what propagates." But then it’s even more complex than that. So here’s what happens among men. The men all get together in their hierarchy; they posit a valued goal; they all accept that as the goal, because otherwise they wouldn’t be cooperating. Then they arrange themselves into a hierarchy, and they let the most competent guys lead, because they want to get to the promised land; they want to get the most competent leaders leading. "Competent" defined by that value.

Ok, so here’s what happens, essentially: the men all get together and vote on the good men, and the good men are then chosen by the women, and those are the people who propagate. And so it’s like men are voting on which men get to reproduce, and women are going along with the vote, and being even more stringent in their choices. Then what you get is the consciousness that, through its acted expression, transforms the potential of the world into actuality and also selects the direction of evolution. Right. And that’s where the meme—Dawkin’s term—turns into the biological reality. This is something that’s so cool about Dawkins. I’ve often thought this about Dawkins. If he would push his thinking to its limits, he would fall right into Jung. Well, and then he’s lost, of course, because that’s a whole other universe. But if you take that meme seriously, and I mean really seriously, you think, "yeah, there’s some ways of conceptualizing that become so all encompassing-"

BS: Powerful. They hardwire themselves.

JP: That’s right. They start to become an actual force of evolution itself. All right, so here’s the case you could make: consciousness extracts the proper world of being from potential through truth, and then it’s good. That’s a hard one, man. That manifests itself in human beings at the level of individual consciousness. That’s the logos within. That’s the metaphysical foundation of the idea of natural right and responsibility. That’s a bloody killer idea. That’s expressed in the hero of heroes, that idea. That hero of heroes is the driving force behind human evolution. So not only do you get the action of the logos metaphysically as the process that extracts order out of chaos at the beginning of time, you also get it as the major driver of evolution. And so then you ask, "ok, then what kind of reality does that have?" Because you chase consciousness back, and it disappears into the mystery of the past. We have no idea what its relationship is with matter. But it’s the force that gives rise to the cosmos and drives evolution. It’s like, you’re getting pretty close to God, there, even just pragmatically speaking.

BS: And you’re certainly not close to, but in the midst of, an argument about free will. Obviously, if you make the hard deterministic argument that free will doesn’t exist and consciousness is merely a trick that your brain is playing on itself, then how exactly does culture propagate? how do these memes propagate? how are people choosing? Sexual selection and natural selection become one and the same, as soon as you boil sexual selection down to natural selection.

JP: Also, I think the free will argument—I see why Harris gets tangled up in that. Well, first of all, deterministic arguments are unbelievably powerful. When we use deterministic models for many things, they really work. So you could say, "well, we’re going to use that by default." It’s like, "fair enough." We’re going to deviant from that with care, but I don’t see people as driven like clocks winding down. First of all, we don’t wind down in any simple way. We’re dissipative structures, to use Schrodinger. What is life? A human being is a dissipative structure. We’re not an entropic structure like a clock running down. We are in some sense, but as living beings we pull energy in. And so we’re not winding down like a deterministic structure. We’re something other than that. The way we treat each other is as logos, as far as I can tell. The way I treat myself, if I’m going to be good to myself, in the proper sense, is that I’m an active agent of choice confronting an infinite landscape of potential, and casting that potential into a reality for good or for evil. And if I treat myself that way, then I have proper respect for myself and proper fear of myself, because I can make bad decisions and warp the structure of reality.

I think if you read Frankl, for example, or Solzhenitsyn, and you see how your bad decisions can warp the structure of reality, then that wakes you up. Ok, so there’s that. If you don’t treat yourself like an active agent imbued with the logos, then your life doesn’t go well. But more, if you don’t treat other people that way, they do not want to play with you. If we set up societies that aren’t predicated on the idea that people are like that, then the societies dissolve or become totalitarian, almost instantly. Then I would say, "well, you’ve got the problem of determinism." It’s like, "fair enough, man." How do you reconcile the fact that, if you lay out a society at every level of analysis on strict deterministic grounds, it fails? Doesn’t that mean your hypothesis has a flaw? Maybe not. Maybe you can say, "no, the facts are independent of the ethical consequences."

BS: Exactly. This is where the true pragmatism question comes back into being. Sam would say, "well, it’s true regardless of what what the effect is," and you would say, "well, it’s obviously not true if morals aren’t constructed for pragmatic reason, and if this pragmatism doesn’t work, it falls into nothingness."

JP: It also depends, to some degree, on how you’re willing to test your hypothesis. I might say, "well, if your hypothesis is factually correct, wouldn’t you assume that, if people based their behaviours—individuals and familial and socially—on that set of facts"—which is basically what Sam claims about facts to begin with—"if you based your ethos on those facts, wouldn’t it work?" Well, he claims that that’s a test. I would say, "well, then it fails that test. It doesn’t work." We have to treat each other like divine centres of consciousness in order for society to work. I can’t see any way out of those arguments.

BS: I can’t see it either, obviously, which is why you and I agree so much on this kind of stuff. I think it’s also the reason why people find your work really inspiring. While the left wants to claim that you are an angry person—they also want to claim that I’m an angry person—I don’t think this has been an angry conversation. I’m quite sure it has not been.

JP: I’m horrified by what the radical left is capable of, but that doesn’t make me angry.

BS: Exactly. And I think it’s demonstrative of why so many people find what you’re doing inspiring. Unlike the radical left, which is consumed with the idea of victimhood and victimology and "we’re victims of the system." Marxism makes the claim that people suck. But the only way to cure people of sucking is by changing the entire system, which will, in some magical fashion, transform the nature of humanity.

JP: Yeah, and in the proper direction.

BS: Exactly. The claim that you’re making, and I hope that I’m making as well, is that human beings do suck, unless they decide to stop sucking. And your whole goal is to tell people exactly how it is that they can clean up their rooms, as your famous phrase goes.

JP: Yeah, well they might as well start with what’s right in front of them. It’s a lot harder than it looks, because to clean up your room means to accept that it’s actually necessary for you to take that little bit of chaos that’s in front of you, that chaotic potential, and cast it into habitable order. And then you have to develop the right attitude towards that. It’s like, "ok, I’m going to put my room in order." Well, what do you mean? "Order" is in relationship to something. If your desk is ordered, it means you’ve ordered it because you’re going to work there, and you’re working there on something valuable. So the order is conceived of in relationship to a telos. It’s like , "ok, you’re going to order your room. Ok, well, what are you going to do in it? What’s your room for?"

BS: What’s the purpose.

JP: What’s the purpose? You can’t order your room without falling into purpose. I would say, "well, if you’re going to fall into purpose, try it out on a local scale first, right?" You don’t want to go out there and change the system. It’s like, "what the hell do you know? Leave the system alone. See what you can do locally. See if you can put yourself together. See if you can put your immediate environment together." If you’re in a chaotic household, and a chaotic household would be one where no one has any discipline, no one has any aims, and there’s a terrible battle between Cain and Abel going on all the time. So, "life sucks, and everything’s miserable, and we’re cynical, and that’s what wisdom is. There’s no point in trying anything, because everything’s meaningless, and who the hell’s going to care in a million years, and you’re a fool to move forward in any case." There’s your household. Ok, now you decide, "no, despite all that, I’m going to put that room in order." You will have a war on your hands, because the first thing that people around you who are aiming down will do is think, "oh, you think you’re so much better than we are, do you? you really think that, you and your fancy god damn plans? We’re going to put every psychological obstacle we can think of in your way, because if you succeed, even in something that trivial, you shed a very dim light on our existence. And so we’re going to do everything we can to take you out."

People think, "oh, well, cleaning your room—that’s just a cliche." You just go ahead and try it, and you see just how much of a cliche that is. And if you’ve got your room in order, then put your office in order. As soon as you do that, you step out into the social world. You’re going to encounter the antipathy between men and women; you’re going to encounter the identity politics in the workplace; you’re going to encounter how you regulate your sexual morality while you’re working with people of the opposite sex; you’re going to encounter the ethics that are necessary to move your business forward. It’s a microcosm. It really is. And so to take those microcosms seriously… Well, that’s what I’m asking people to do. I’m saying, "look, it isn’t only about you being happy. There’s a lots of times in your life you’re not going to be happy, and so that’s not going to work. You want to have something meaningful. That’s the boat that will take you through the storm, when you batten down the hatches." But it isn’t even that. Meaningful, engaged life will see you through the catastrophes, even though that’s a big deal, right? That’s a great proposition, and I really believe it’s true, because you can say to yourself, "yeah, it’s worth it." And great, man. The other part of it, too, which is, "don’t be thinking that your errors aren’t linked to hell, because they are."

The brilliant commentators on the 20th century totalitarian states and all of their atrocities said the same thing over and over: "it isn’t ‘top-down evil leader manipulating innocent masses.’ That’s not it. It’s the moral failings of every single individual unwilling to say their truth; unwilling to act out what they know to be right, that accumulate and produce the catastrophic state." And so when you’re fussing about with your life, when you're not manifesting your potential, when you’re falsifying your speech and your actions in the service of short term expedience, you are working to bring about hell on earth, and that’s true. It’s true literally, and then I suspect it’s also true metaphorically. That's a real truth, man. When you get the metaphorical and the literal working at the same time, that’s real. So it isn’t just that you have to fix up yourself so you can have a better life. It’s like, "who cares about you?" for a moment. You have to fix up your life, because if you don’t, every time you make a mistake that you know to be a mistake, you’re leading the world toward hell, and I believe that. I think it’s true.

BS: Well, Jordan Peterson’s book is 12 Rules for Life. Honestly, we could do this all day long, and we’ll certainly have you back. I really appreciate the time. There’s a reason so many people follow Jordan. There’s a reason so many people are buying his book. The book is fantastic, and his other book, Maps of Meaning, is also fantastic, so I would get a copy of that, as well. Jordan, thanks so much for stopping by. I really appreciate it.

JP: Thanks Ben. This was great.



Russell Brand: Dr. Jordan Peterson, thank you for coming on Under The Skin. It’s lovely to see you again.

Dr. Jordan Peterson: It’s good to see you too. It’s nice to meet in London.

RB: Yeah. It’s different, isn’t it? Both of us were exiled in Los Angeles, in our last conversation. But I enjoyed it very much. I got a lot from it. I’m happy to talk to you, more. This is very much home turf for me now. We’re in London; we’re in a publishing office. You’ve been promoting a book. I presume that’s why you’re here.

JP: Yes. I’m doing a couple of public lectures.

RB: How do you find that? In a way, I’ve been comparing you to the British opposition leader, Jeremy Corbyn, in that you’ve been doing this for ages and now you’re experiencing an almost unprecedented level of attention. But I’m assuming that your skill set is applicable. You’re a lecturer. You’re a clinical psychoanalyst. So it’s not like, "oh, my God—there’s cameras!"

JP: Right, right. Well, the large-scale lectures I’m doing aren’t that much different in kind from the lectures I was doing at the university. I mean, the venues are larger.

RB: Yeah. How much is the Apollo? Three thousand seats, I think? Maybe more.

JP: Yeah. There were 5,000 at the Apollo.

RB: Were you not nervous?

JP: I’m not as nervous doing that as I am, often, going off to talk to journalists.

RB: Individual journalists?

JP: Yeah. There’s a variety of things about those venues that work in my favour. I like talking to crowds. I’ve always enjoyed lecturing. Lecturing to several thousand people isn’t that much different than lecturing to several hundred people. But I also know that the people who come—they’re happy to be there. I’m speaking to a welcoming crowd. All of the details are essentially under my control. I’m actually enjoying it quite a bit. I mean, I’m apprehensive before, because, well, you should be, you know? I want to do a good job, and I want to make sure things go well, and I want to get through the material properly, and get a little farther in my thinking. I’m trying to make each time I lecture better than the last time. Obviously, I don’t always succeed at that. But it’s good. I’m enjoying it, and my wife is a very good travel companion. She’s very stable, and she helps me plan my days. So we’ve got it down to a bit of a routine, I would say.

RB: Tammy is in the room with us. We’ve already met, previously, in Los Angeles. You won’t be on mic—there isn’t a mic—but it’s just in case listeners are wondering why—perhaps they can detect in my voice that I’m occasionally glancing towards a spouse. The reason is because I am. I’m curious, when you’re doing these lectures, is there not a performance component?

JP: Definitely. A lecture theatre is a "theatre," and a lecture is a form of theatre. Now, it’s a serious form of theatre, but theatre can be serious. Partly what I’m doing is presenting ideas to an audience, but I’m also modelling the act of engaging with ideas. That’s the theatrical end of it. I don’t give the same talk twice. I have my stories, and I have my collection of things I know and talk about, but I try to do two things: I’m always talking to specific individuals in the audience, so I’m having a conversation with the audience. That’s part of the dynamic element of the performance. The other thing I’m trying to do is further my thinking on the topics I’m addressing. There is a theatrical element of that. I think the closest thing, really, it compares to is probably standup comedy. Although, I think the routines that comedians have are probably more well and formally practiced than the talks that I engage in. I don’t really think of it as delivering a lecture to an audience. I’m trying to think about complicated things in realtime, with an audience there to participate, and to use the audience as an indicator of whether or not what I’m saying is gripping and comprehensible.

RB: Your apprehension and understandable adrenaline prior to going on stage doesn’t lead you to lean into schtick? Which would be the opposite of what you’re describing: wanting to remain engaged in the dialectic process of discovery. Obviously, I am a comedian. For us, I would argue that there is a distinction between performing before two hundred people or five thousand people. Around two hundred, I feel like I’m very relaxed; I’m comfortable; I feel like I’ve got a lot of space in there. Five thousand, I feel like, "sharpen up, now. You’ve got no room," particularly because the other crucial difference is, there needs to be a laugh every 20 to 30 seconds. If there isn’t, it gets pretty frosty up there. It’s appealing to me, as a comedian that’s interested in furthering intellectual debate, looking at the new intersections between politics and spirituality. Perhaps they’ve always been there, these evaporating contexts, the emergence of new ideas—perhaps best exemplified by your own particular trajectory. It’s interesting, to me, that these spaces are now becoming available for types of performance that aren’t so contingent on rapture and applause.

JP: I know. It is a very strange thing, and I’m not sure what to make of it. You see Sam Harris doing something quite similar. Richard Dawkins is doing something quite similar. I’ve been trying to conceptualize this. One comparable audience, or one comparable situation, is that of standup comedians. Another, I suspect, are travelling evangelical types.

RB: Yeah!

JP: Of course, what they’re doing is explicitly religious. This has elements of both of those. What’s emerging that’s so interesting is that there’s a clear public appetite for high-level intellectual conversation, if it’s dynamic. I don’t know what’s accounting for that, all of a sudden. Maybe it’s because these sorts of discussions aren’t taking place like they should, in the classical media space.

RB: You might be right there. To slightly mangle the Jung quote that you use in your book, 12 Rules—that I’m really enjoying, actually—"one could infer motivations from results."

JP: Right.

RB: Perhaps it is that political discourse, social discourse, has been superficial—detached from meaning, from purpose, from experience; that there is an opening appetite for substance. People are starting to—as you said about theatre, before. The origins of theatre and the origins of religion are closely connected, and both of them still owe a debt, or at least, functionally, must relate to meaning and purpose—giving us stories that help illuminate the path we’re walking.

JP: There’s something about that that’s profoundly correct. The New York Times has recently written about the rise of the so-called Intellectual Dark Web, which is a term that Eric Weinstein so brilliantly coined, I would say, and very thoughtfully. I think the thing that unites the people who are loosely grouped into that collection is that they are having serious conversations with an audience that they respect. They’re a very diverse range of people—Sam Harris and I disagree about many things, for example. But Sam respects his audiences, and he’s engaging them in extremely serious discourse, about very deep topics—about the structure of reality, actually, and the relationship between science and religion.

I think it is a consequence of the fact that not only has our public discourse, let’s say, in the media and politics become shallow—I think it’s become unbearably shallow in the universities. It’s become so ideological. It’s just not helpful. I was interviewed by a New York Times journalist last week. She’s going to publish this on Sunday. She did a literature degree at Columbia. She told me—she was quite appalled, actually, by her degree, especially in hindsight—that she didn’t know until she graduated that there was any way of reading great literature other than through a postmodern lens. The postmodern lens takes a book, whatever it happens to be, and you decide which power hierarchy the author was serving and who he or she has excluded from consideration. So it’s completely read through a political lens, as if the book’s nothing but a tool of a political and economic domination, essentially. That’s the assumption. Everything’s contaminated by politics and power to some degree, right? But that doesn’t mean there’s nothing to art and literature except in service of group domination. It’s an appalling way of looking at the world.

RB: It would be an extraordinary bias to bring to Jane Eyre. It would be difficult to make sense of it, through that lens. Economics and politics—of course important themes are going to be present in great works of art.

JP: But they’re still great works of art—that’s the thing. Even with something as transient as comedy, let’s say—you can’t reduce comedy to the political or the economic. Comics who become too ideological—like musicians who become too ideological—they’re just not funny anymore. I mean, you can have your viewpoint, left or right, and that’s fine, and people do, but you have to be able to transcend that viewpoint continually, and you have to be able to criticize it. Otherwise, you’re not amusing. You just become a demagog, of sorts.

RB: Yes. I would agree that, once there’s a rubric to which you become enslaved, it becomes dogmatic. Then there’s no room for nuance; there’s no room for hypocrisy, humour, the transcendent, mirth, chaos. These forces need to be unleashed.

JP: There’s also things you can no longer laugh about, because you’re so committed to your axioms. You dare not transgress against them. That’s deadly, if you’re a comedian. The rule for comedy would be—and this is something I like about Sarah Silverman: she will say anything, if she thinks it’s funny. She’s very daring in that manner. I’ve heard her tell jokes that really would curl your hair. But you can tell by watching her: something will pop into her head, and she goes, "jeez, I don’t know if I should say this," and then she’ll say it, and it’s often horribly funny, and horribly funny is a good kind of funny. It’s daring, and it’s something I really admire about comedians, too: they’ll take that risk. It’s something, also, that I’ve found disturbing with regards to the many things I find disturbing about university campuses: so many comedians won’t go perform on university campuses anymore, because they can’t be funny. People get offended, and it’s a false offended.

RB: I think it’s a kind of Simon Says type of—do you know that game? There’s certainly things that we know we’re not allowed to say; there’s certain things we know we’re supposed to think. There’s a kind of formulaic dance—a courtly behaviour, I’ve heard it referred to as. We are meant to pay a homage to a particular type of set of protocols and manners, and it’s not necessarily anchored to a real morality. It’s not anchored to a sense of spirit, or to a sense of love or kindness. It’s like, "these are the rules that we abide by." I want to talk to you a bit about the 12 Steps, and the model for handling addiction. I’ve written about myself in my book, Recovery, because I want to see what you think of it. 12 Steps have anonymous fellowships. If I were to belong to them, I wouldn’t be able to say I belonged to them, without breaching their code of anonymity. But what’s positive about this approach to addiction is—as we have discussed off mic—it creates community. Other people that have got a similar endeavour—in fact, it was Jung who identified this solution. He said that people who have got chronic addiction issues will struggle to change, unless they have a spiritual realization of some kind and the support of community.

JP: The spiritual realization component—that’s actually supported by the relevant addiction literature. One of the classic cures for addiction is spiritual transformation. The hardcore scientists have laid that out as a reality in the addiction literature.

RB: I agree, because they use more secular language around that, as spiritual transformation could just be a change of perspective, a renewal.

JP: A radical change of perspective.

RB: Typically, from my experience, that’s from a self-centred view, a self-obsessive view, about getting your own needs met—a solipsistic, narcissistic perspective, about "life is just this adventure where I go around trying to accumulate and accrue," to, "oh, wow—I’m here to be of service." That’s the transition, microscopically. But in addition to community—like having connections between one another—the 12 Steps themselves, I think, are an interesting model for transformation, and shouldn’t be overlooked. In fact, what my book was about—could that method be transposed to anybody who’s interested in change? I wanted to talk to you about that, to get your perspective.

JP: Sure.

RB: The first step is acknowledging that you are powerless over your addiction, and that your life has become unmanageable. Just admitting, "I don’t want to be in this situation."

JP: OK. There’s two parts to that admission. One is that you’re in trouble… I guess there’s three. "You’re in trouble, and it’s serious. Things could be better. And you don’t have the wherewithal, at the moment, to make them better." The thing that’s interesting about that is that there’s a kind of radical humiliation and humility that goes along with that. So you say, "I have a problem, and what I know, at the moment, isn’t sufficient to solve it." Great, because now you’ve opened yourself up to the possibility of learning something. You say, "I don’t know enough to fix this." It’s like, "OK, well, you could learn." One of the things that’s so interesting about people is that, if they decide they have a problem, and they also notice that they could learn, the probability that they will learn goes way up.

RB: That’s very interesting. You’ve actually conflated the first three steps there, in your analysis of the first one. The first one is admission that there’s a problem. The second one is recognizing that things could improve—coming to believe that a power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity. The third one is to make a decision to turn our life and our will over to the care of God, as we understood God.

JP: We can talk about that from a secular perspective, and say, "well, there’s a higher order moral principle that needs to be brought into the situation." And you sort of described that, right at the beginning of the question. You said, "well, from a psychological perspective, partly what you do, when you move from an addicted state, is move from a viewpoint of the gratification of immediate desire—and maybe the accumulation of things as a marker of success—to the notion that, no: you actually have a higher purpose, and that higher purpose might involve being of service." That could be of service to yourself—which means you wouldn’t be addicted anymore, because that’s not a good way of being in service to yourself—and to the broader community, however you might define that. That’s a higher-order purpose. It can integrate your motivations at a level that doesn’t leave you at the whim of impulse. That’s the purpose of a higher-order motivation. OK, so we’ve got three.

RB: Yes. That’s the first three. It’s to get you to that position where you’re willing to change, believe in the possibility of change, and accept help in order to achieve that change. The fourth and fifth steps are about inventorying—this is where the 12-Step Program becomes a fusion of spirituality and psychoanalysis, because the fourth step is like a four-column method, where you write down a list of all your resentments in your life: your childhood resentments, your resentments against the government, people you work with. You write it all down, and it’s a diagnostic tool where you identify what it is in you that doesn’t like that. And also, interestingly—in 12-Step theology, let’s call it—it says that, "any time that you are personally disturbed, you have to take responsibility for it, to a degree." There is something in you that’s being [inaudible].

JP: Yes, you should at least ask yourself that question: "is it me, or is it the world?"

RB: Yes.

JP: Well, let’s consider first the possibility that it might be—I wrote about that in the sixth Rule: "put your house in perfect order."

RB: Yes, yes. In fact, I did a truncated and somewhat more linguistically explicit, expletive-laden version of the 12 Steps, and I’ve got your 12 Rules for Life, here. They don’t necessarily correlate… Say your first one, "stand up straight with your shoulders back." That’s a great chapter, I think. I love the lobster stuff, and the ancient, timeless—almost roots—of hierarchy.

JP: Yeah.

RB: And the chemicals that are at play—what’s happening when we talk about self-esteem. The sixth one, "set your own house in perfect order before you criticize the world"—steps four and five, in the 12-Step Program, deal with that: Inventory what’s going on in your life. Inventory what your baggage is, in your own personal narrative.

JP: It’s very practical. Let’s say you want to fix up your house—which is, actually, quite a lot like fixing yourself up, and which is quite a common dream metaphor. The first thing you want to do is go around and see what needs to be fixed. The interesting thing about that is akin to what comedians do: comedians look at a problem and rise above it, and make a joke about it. As soon as you’re willing to admit that you have a problem, then you’ve immediately contacted the part of yourself that’s at least strong enough to admit that you have a problem. The act of admitting the problem is actually the first step to solving it.

RB: Yes.

JP: It’s an optimistic step, because you might say, "oh, my God—I can’t admit that I have a problem, because what if I can’t solve it?" Well, exactly—then, maybe, you won’t admit to it. If you do admit to it, you’re simultaneously admitting to the possibility that you could solve it.

RB: Yes.

JP: And then it can actually become something that’s optimistic.

RB: Yes.

JP: You can say, "my life is horrible. I’m doing 50 things wrong. Well, great! I can fix those things. Then, maybe, it won’t be so horrible."

RB: The admission itself demonstrates progression and possibility for further progression.

JP: Exactly. That’s why humility is always stressed in great religious traditions. Humility is precisely that. You have to look at why you’re not so good.

RB: Yeah.

JP: That has to break down your pride, to some degree, and your arrogance. That’s great, because if you break down your pride and your arrogance, then you’re primed to learn, and you can solve your problems. It’s a bit crushing, to begin with, because you might think, "oh, my God—there’s a lot of things wrong with me."

RB: Yes.

JP: But then, at least, you’re on the road to fixing them.

RB: My personal journey of recovery has been like a kind of death. When I was 27, it was like the death of the drug addict self. That guy died.

JP: That’s funny, because I told Tammy when we were coming here today that, when you were 27, you made the decision to live. I knew it was 27, because celebrities who are sort of on fire die all the time at 27, because they don’t make that decision. They don’t decide that they’re going to take that final step into maturation. They want to hold on to that Peter Pan thing, that possibility.

RB: Pluripotent.

JP: You bet. Exactly that. They want to hold on to that. You can’t hold on to that and live.

RB: Yes, and then there’s a further death. I’m noticing now, in my early forties, that I’m now at the midway point, in a sort of Dante-esque way. Now I’m moving towards the grave, and now there’s a different kind of alertness emerging. Back to Step four and five, this process of inventorying. After you’ve made an inventory and you’ve honestly and openly put down everything: incidents of child abuse, things you’ve said to other people—once you’ve been willing to inscribe your shame, then you tell another person, a person that you trust. In the original literature, it says it could be a cleric, a doctor, or whatever. In 12 Steps, it’s typically a mentor figure. But that’s the role of confession, which is obviously a huge part of psychoanalysis. The part in your book that I think this pertains to is when you talk about the dragon. You said there was that kids book that you read, about the dragon getting bigger and bigger if it’s not identified. I think four and five are somewhat like that.

JP: Yeah, and part of the point of that kid’s book is that, as soon as you turn around and look at something, it tends to shrink. That’s partly because—imagine you have a memory that you won’t confront. Well, there’s something in that memory that’s terrifying, and that means that it’s sort of associated with everything else that’s terrifying. It’s a horrible memory, but then, when you turn around and look at it, you think, "yeah, it’s horrible; but it’s horrible in this precise and defined way." That takes it away from all the other potential horrors of it. It starts to shrink it, right away. It also makes you into the thing that can turn around and look at the horror, which is a real positive transformational act, on your part.

RB: That’s true—that, somehow, being prescriptive and being specific, the problem becomes manageable. Otherwise, it’s limitless in its potential. It becomes apocalyptic, in the end. What’s the worst thing that’s coming? I could be destroyed, and everyone I love could be destroyed, and earth itself could be destroyed. Until you say, "well, actually what this is, is that you feel inadequate, because you weren’t role-modelled correctly." "Well, all right. Maybe I can take care of that."

JP: Right. It’s still bad, but it’s not everything. You phrased that exactly right: without that attentive delimiting, it becomes apocalyptic. That’s a very, very old idea. One of the things that happens in the Mesopotamian creation myth, the Enuma Elis, is that the gods are the offspring of chaos. That’s a good way of thinking about it. They become very careless, and they destroy their category system—they destroy their father, essentially, and chaos comes flooding back. That’s what happens to people who aren’t looking at things and delimiting them properly. They become apocalyptic, and do them in.

RB: But sometimes, in mythology, there is the positive confronting of the God, e.g. Prometheus. So sometimes we need to steal the fire; sometimes we need to challenge these orthodoxies, don’t we?

JP: Yes, absolutely. Part of the death that you’re describing is actually the confrontation with a form of tyrant. Your previously-addicted self was the tyrant over your emergent self.

RB: Yes.

JP: And so it’s an internal tyrant, and you said it was predicated on a false value system—that’s a false set of gods, essentially. So you had to confront that; that is a kind of death.

RB: I also think that addiction, or addictive tendencies—and I don’t mean as severe as chemical dependencies. All forms of addiction are a kind of self-constructed formaldehyde, to preserve you in a state of trauma. The trauma is acknowledged; no means to navigate trauma are present, because of the isolation, because you have no mentor. You have no doctrine, you have no community. So addiction steps in: "This is how I will preserve; this is how I will not die." Notice there is a habit, a repeated pattern to sustain you—a holding pattern—so that you don’t die. There is no way out; there’s no guide; there’s no path. You’re just in the forest, and there isn’t a way out. So I thought that addiction, from personal experience—and I hope and suspect more broadly—is a means for stasis, for preservation, after trauma. The rupture occurs, is not addressed, and a means for survival emerges in a form of addiction. Addiction is not your nemesis: it is your friend.

JP: Well, there’s certainly a literature on addiction that indicates that many people use addictive substances as a form of self-medication. They tend to find the drug that best medicates them, let’s say. For different people, that’s different drugs.

RB: Or even gambling.

JP: Yeah.

RB: One of the other things I’m proposing in my book—to use rather grandiose terminology—is that the template for recovery from obvious forms of addiction could be applicable to less evident forms of addiction, i.e. just patterns and habits.

JP: Yeah. Well, so far, the things you’ve laid out would be in keeping with that idea.

RB: Would they?

JP: Well, you admit to the problem. I think the idea of laying out your resentments is unbelievably useful, because that’s also a way of dealing with the malevolence within you that might interfere with your own recovery.

RB: Yes.

JP: If you’re angry at yourself, if you’re angry at your parents, if you’re angry at the world, the probability that you’re going to be in a mental state that’s going to allow you to chart a positive course for yourself is very, very low.

RB: How can you have a clear and authentic relationship with your wife, if you’ve not correctly understood what you feel about your own mother? If you feel like you were enmeshed or trapped in some way—if I’ve not understood that, if I’ve not gained a new perspective, if I’ve not transcended it by sharing it with another person…

JP: You see that in the Disney Sleeping Beauty story, when the prince is encapsulated in the castle, in the dungeon, at the end. Before he goes and rescues Sleeping Beauty, he has to go and confront his terrible mother. She turns into the dragon of chaos itself. He has to use honesty and truth to confront her. Until he does that, he can’t free the maiden from her sleep.

RB: Yes, yes.

JP: That’s called the "freeing of the anima from the negative mother archetype," in Jungian psychology. It’s precisely that. That negative feminine will be overlaid on your partner, unless you’re able to clarify it, and clarify your relationship with it. That could be something like overprotection, like in your past—or it could be neglect, for that matter. Or it could be the rejection at the hands of many, many women, before you encounter this woman. You’re going to bring that bitterness forward, as a kind of projection.

RB: If we are unwilling to undertake this kind of excavation, then we are doomed to continually have relationships that are cutaneous. The superficial coordinates will govern our experience of relationships.

JP: Yes. That’s the repetition compulsion, from the Freudian perspective. That isn’t how Freud explained it; that’s how a Jungian would explain it. But the simple explanation of it is, well, if you bring the same set of unexamined presuppositions to every situation, the same fate will play out. You might say, "well, all those women are the same." It’s like, "well, actually, no. But the part of them you’re able to make contact with acts the same every time." That’s a very different thing.

RB: Brilliant. This is where six and seven, the next Steps, chronologically occur. Six, having done this inventory, you recognize what patterns have been at play in your life—which "defects of character have governed you:" often pride, wanting to control other people’s perspective, self-pity, self-centredness, intolerance, impatience, greed, jealously, envy, lust, sloth.

JP: That’s where you identify the seven deadly sins, and how they play out in your life, essentially.

RB: Yes. Step 6 is about becoming willing to live differently—saying, "are you actually willing to let go of lust? or do you like lust? do you like being impatient? does it serve you, in some way, to be slothful?"

JP: It’s highly probable that it does. It’s easy; it’s gratifying; it’s powerful; it’s pleasurable—especially in the short term. There are reasons that people are tempted by the seven deadly sins.

RB: They’re kind of glorious—they’re dark glory and beauty.

JP: Oh, absolutely. That’s exactly right. There’s a dark romanticism, and you really see that in the death of celebrities around 27. They fall in love with the allure of that romantic death, and it does them in.

RB: So the anti-libido; the dark libido; the death force. So once you have diagnosed which particular defects of character have been most prominent in your path, and become willing to let go of them, Step 7 is making a concerted and real effort to live without them.

JP: That’s a sacrifice there, eh? That’s, "what are you willing to sacrifice, in order to move forward?" You have to give up something that you love, and you may have to give up the thing that you love best. That’s the fundamental sacrificial motif.

RB: Sacrifice is an unattractive idea in our society, that’s based on consuming and indulgence. This is again, perhaps, where you and I somewhat differ. Whilst this will not change about the individual’s engagement—a kind of Step 1 acknowledgement that there needs to be change—this is where I say there needs to be a social responsibility. For whatever reason, our society’s become a manifestation of these darker impulses. These are the prevalent forces, at least in the kind of society I live in.

JP: Too much emphasis on immediate gratification.

RB: Too much emphasis, because immediate gratification is a tool of consumerism. This would be my argument. But at this point in the program, the spiritual becomes—I find, personally—undeniable. You have to call to something else. You have to, in a sense, lay yourself open. The idea of prayer becomes quite important.

JP: So there’s a Jungian idea, there. The Jungian Self is the thing that guides the ego through transformations. Imagine the ego, which is what you think you are—well, the thing about the ego is that the ego can be wrong, and the ego can die and be reborn. What that indicates is that there’s something underneath the ego that can guide that process of transformation.

RB: Yes, yes.

JP: Partly what you’re calling on, when you call on this higher power, is—at least from the psychological perspective—a decision to rely on that thing that can guide you through transformation.

RB: Yes, because surely—as we said, in relation to another—we are likely relating to a set of coordinates that we impose on the female. The same would be true of the self: we have created an egoic impression; we have constructed an artificial self. But beneath it there is a higher Self, or an ulterior Self.

JP: That’s right. It’s often composed of things that you refuse to or weren’t willing to develop. So when Jung talks about, for example, the incorporation of the shadow—you’ve constructed an ego, and there’s things it can do and can’t do, that it’s allowed to do and isn’t allowed to do. Then there’s a shadow domain that consists of the things you could do, but haven’t. Some of that’s terrible, but some of it’s what you need to break free.

RB: Is there an infinite variety in the shadow, or is there sort of templates, there? Is there, would you say, a common component?

JP: Aggression and lust are the two, because they’re the two that are most difficult to integrate into the ego. Aggression destroys, and, of course, lust subsumes the individual to sexual desire.

RB: Lust is identified as a very powerful self; it can subsume; so I suppose that’s why a lot of theological doctrines focus on the control of lust.

JP: Well, it’s a disruptive force. For example, if you make a medium- to long-term relationship with someone, and you negotiate that, that provides you with a stable structure that can operate across your entire life. It’s good for you; it’s good for them; it’s good for your kids; it’s good for society. But then, if you’re really attracted to someone momentarily, you can be driven to act on that. All the rest of that can burn up. So it’s no wonder that it’s viewed as a force of tremendous disruption. Now, it’s also a force of tremendous life, right? You want to be attracted to people; you want to have that vital libido as part of what’s driving you forward. But hopefully it’s on your side, and not working against you. If you’re successful, and you put yourself together, and you’re disciplined, you should still be maximally sexually attracted. But it should be under your control. You’re not the puppet of that force, anymore. It’s integrated into you, and that’s a much better way to manage it.

RB: In your understanding, how is the shadow incorporated? What rituals, what ceremonies, what behaviours successfully incorporate the shadow, say, using the example of lust? What’s a way back in for the lust that has been disembodied or repressed? What’s the safe way back in? Is there one?

JP: Well, I think part of it is to admit to your desires within your own relationship. You might say, "well, I’m tired of my wife." It’s like, "well, yeah. Maybe—maybe you’re tired of the games that you’re intelligent enough to play with your wife. But she’s as pluripotent as you are." You have to admit to your desires, let’s say, and maybe you have to make them consciously manifest within your own relationship.

RB: Hmm.

JP: People do that by dressing up, or by playing sexually, I would say.

RB: Yeah, play.

JP: Play is a transformative element.

RB: Yes.

JP: It might be that you’re uncomfortable with the idea of your wife as sexual plaything, because you think that a woman that’s married should be proper and prim, and should only behave sexually in a certain way, in which case—well, that becomes stale and dull, and you’re more likely to be tempted by something on the outside.

RB: To me, that’s a very obvious example of how habitualized thinking is prohibitive, even without reaching the extremes of self-destructive, addictive tendencies. If I have a habit of regarding my wife as Object A—even if that’s not objectification as we typically take it, but limiting beliefs about my wife—the tools that break down addictive thought patterns could be used to create new terrains, new liberty, new play. So once you’ve done up to Step 7—you’re right, it’s a sacrifice of the old self, and a handing over to some kind of sublime, divine Self. Step 8, you make a list of people you have harmed and become willing to make amends to them. So you look back and go, "oh, God—I shouldn’t have stolen that; I shouldn’t have done that; I treated that person badly; that was wrong; I lied." So it’s moral; it becomes quite a moral process.

JP: That’s a real repentance and atonement. Atonement is "at-one-ment." If you’re carrying transgressions that you regard as transgressions now, in your life, you don’t want to carry those forward. You want to step forward in life without that moral burden, because you’ll have contempt for yourself, otherwise, and you won’t take care for yourself.

RB: Also, in a sense, what you’re talking about is allowing lust back in—incorporating lust. This is a broader method for incorporating annexed aspects of the Self. Like, "how can I fully love myself, if I know I treated that person abominably?" Well, if I go back, and say "that was wrong; I did you wrong; I owe you an amends," you invite that part of your life in.

JP: That’s right.

RB: You amend your path through life, as well as teaching yourself that is not the way we proceed anymore. That’s Step 8.

JP: That’s real action in the world. It’s not a hypothetical, at the point. It’s kind of like telling people what you’ve written down about your faults, because it makes it real when you’re acting it out with someone else. It’s not only a mental thing, at that point.

RB: Step 8 is, "write up the list of people." Step 9 is, "now go do it." It makes the distinction, I think, to create a space for you where you’re not continually thinking, "I’m not fucking doing that; I’m not going to apologize; I was abused by them; fuck that—they did as much wrong as I did."

JP: Right, which is not the point.

RB: It’s not the point.

JP: They might have done more wrong than you did, but you’re still stuck with the fact that you still did something wrong, and that’s not good.

RB: That’s right, and if you refuse to surmount the obstacle of some arbitrary measure of who is more wrong, then you continue to cast yourself in victimhood.

JP: That’s exactly right.

RB: You have no personal autonomy.

JP: It doesn’t matter if you’re only 5 per cent at fault, and it also doesn’t matter if the other person apologizes to you. They should; it would be better for them; it might make things lay out. That’s not the point.

RB: This, perhaps, is where what I think is significant—now that your life has become not a negotiation between you and other beings as materially present themselves, but between yourself and a higher purpose that has been declared earlier, you are now operating on a spiritual plane. You are no longer about, "if I do that, I get that." It precisely doesn’t matter if the other person goes, "I don’t care if you apologize or not. Fuck off."

JP: In religious language, that would be expressed as the discovery of your Father in Heaven, instead of your earthly father. Your Father in Heaven would be the higher spiritual authority to which you owe allegiance. You can think about that either in religious terms or in nonreligious terms—what you’ve done is you’ve, in some sense, abstracted the idea of a higher authority and a higher purpose, and you’ve decided to devote yourself to that. That’s a religious act.

RB: That’s precisely antithetical to postmodernism: "there is an essence; there is a code; there is a way; there is a truth."

JP: That’s right. That’s what is precisely antithetical. The postmodern claim is that there are multiple ways of looking at the world. That’s true, but the antithesis of that is, "yes, but just because there are multiple ways of looking at the world doesn’t mean that there are multiple proper ways of looking at the world."

RB: Yes.

JP: In fact, there’s a very narrow range of proper ways of looking at the world.

RB: My concern with atheism has always been its sort of easy affiliation with nihilism: "oh, why don’t we just wander over there and start fucking people, then?" That’s where my mind immediately goes. If there is not an order, why not smash everything to smithereens? You’re saying, ideological, that is what’s happening. Ideologically, we are deconstructing God; we’re deconstructing morality; we’re deconstructing gender.

JP: That was the danger that both Nietzsche and Dostoevsky pointed to, clearly. You dispense with the transcendent principle, and you open up the landscape for impulsive nihilism.

RB: They responded to post-enlightenment rationalism. Is that what Dostoevsky and Nietzsche were responding to?

JP: They were responding to, essentially, the idea of the death of God. Both of them, and explicitly.

RB: Is that an enlightenment idea? Where is the death of God happening prior to Nietzsche?

JP: At the hands of a kind of arrogant and narrow rationalism and materialism.

RB: Exponentially, that has led us where we’re going now, which is a kind of digging the earth from beneath our feet, putting ourselves into the abyss.

JP: That’s right. That’s the hypothesis, precisely.

RB: The last three Steps. Step 10 is, like, "continue to make inventory. Let this process continue." For me, in psychoanalytic terms, it’s like when there’s a moment—I know any spike in my energy: if I go, "oh, I felt something. That was interesting. I felt jealous, there. I felt small, in that moment."

JP: Exactly.

RB: These are the moments I know. "How was I participating in that? What belief of mine was being challenged? Is that a helpful belief?" "Belief" being a thought that I like having.

JP: Right. That’s a kind of consciousness: "well, I’m going to fall apart. I’m going to make mistakes. I don’t want to make mistakes. I’m going to keep an eye out for when I do make mistakes, and I’m going to make them conscious. And then I’m going to try to work on them."

RB: Yes—"bringing them into consciousness." My number one fear on a personal level, and possibly on a social level—I don’t quite know how to extrapolate or conflate those two notions—is unconsciousness. I get very afraid when I’m dealing with unconscious individuals—when people don’t know why they’re doing what they’re doing. You might see this in violent rage, or in less dramatic or theatrical behaviour.

JP: Yeah. There’s a great idea that lurks at the bottom of the Christian mythological tradition: a little bit of consciousness destroyed the original paradise. We became conscious enough to be aware of our own mortality. The cure for that is way more consciousness, not a return to unconsciousness.

RB: Yes. There’s no going back. I sometimes think the plethora of zombie movies is, you know, "they don’t know they’re already dead!"

JP: That danger of the zombie is the danger of the desire for unconsciousness, as a solution to life’s problems.

RB: I think, again, this something we are being invited to participate in, through consumerism: to live your life continually on the frequency of unconscious energy, such as desire and fear. We’re not being invited to participate on the level of conscious interaction, presence, in the moment.

JP: Well, you could make that case if you made the case that consumerism promotes the gratification of immediate desires, above all else.

RB: I think it does. That’s what I’m pushing for. With this original sin, a little bit of consciousness is a dangerous thing. We become aware of our vulnerability and mortality, our nakedness, our corporeal nature. But the solution to this is…

JP: To become more conscious.

RB: How is that? Is that the whole rest of the Bible?

JP: Yes, I would say so.

RB: So I’m wondering, when does that get resolved? Not when they get kicked out of the garden; not when Cain slays Abel.

JP: Well, part of what happens in the redemptive story is, if you think about Christ as a symbolic figure—symbolic of the process of transformation that we just described—one of the morals of the Christian passion is that you need to radically accept your limitations. Part of this "keeping your sins before your eyes," which you just described: "here’s all the ways I fall short of the glory of God," let’s say. "I make this mistake, I make this mistake, I make this mistake." That’s all consciousness, and it’s painful. You think, "well, you become more conscious of this glorious process of enlightenment," and, overall, it is. But the things that you need to become conscious of are precisely the things that you least want to become conscious of.

This is the motif that Jung identified in the Alchemical tradition. The Alchemical motto, so to speak, was, "that which you most need to find will be found where you least want to look." Right. And everyone knows that’s true. You tell someone that, and they go, "oh, yeah. I know that’s true." It’s also the greatest barrier to enlightenment, because if enlightenment is all tulips and sunshine, then everyone would be enlightened. But it’s not. It’s this continual bringing before yourself all your proclivity for transgression—obviously, because how are you going to solve your problems, if you’re not aware of them?

RB: People don’t want the old discipline, do they, Jordan?

JP: Well, it’s not surprising. But the alternative is far worse. That’s the thing. I was very curious—like I said, I talked about this with Tammy, when we were coming here. I thought, "Russell decided to live when he was 27. I would like to know why." So why did you? Why did you make the decision to not allow what was consuming you to kill you?

RB: In a sense, it was taken out of my hands. For the first time, I encountered positive male authority figures. They were able to address that, in particular. I was sent to a treatment center. I had three months. I had time to think. I passed from childhood directly into addictive behaviours. In fact, those addictive behaviours were already present in childhood, in less toxic forms. In retrospect, my relationship with chocolate was addictive. My relationship with pornography, as an adolescent, was addictive. I was using it for medical purposes. So when substances became an option, in adolescence, it was seamless. That meant that my emotional growth was arrested, at that point. The reason I was able to stop was because I was offered help. I was given help by people at the management company that I was working with. They said, "you’re a serious drug addict. You should go away."

JP: OK, so partly that meant that they regarded you as the sort of valuable commodity that was worth preserving.

RB: Yes, there was a degree of that.

JP: That’s helpful. Even if it’s purely an economic interest, there’s something to that. And so then you went into treatment, and you found some people.

RB: Curiously, the place that I went was run by an atheist, Chip Somers. But the 12-Step principles—you can’t unpick it from the Christian Oxford Group. For me, it is more appealing when you talk about it in Jungian terms, although I have no problem with the sublime and the divine. I live for that shit. I was always trying to get out of my head, off my face. Those were the things I wanted: a sublime experience; an experience of what is beyond the material. That is what I wanna know. But once I was in that environment, and given drugs to help with my addiction to opiates… During that time, I suppose, in a way, I didn’t fully address the issue of addiction, because I was really promiscuous for about a decade. That behaviour was transplanted, kind of effortlessly. But I do remember a kind of moment of epiphany—if "epiphany" is revelation of previously concealed truth—when it first occurred to me: "I suppose you don’t have to do drugs every day." I remember that thought entering, and it being like, "oh, yeah. I never thought about that," because I’d found a solution. It worked for managing pain—for preventing further mental investigation or discovery of conclusions that would have been unhelpful, and that I wouldn’t have been able to deal with.

I think, in a lot of cases—and I’m sure there’s many, many variables—that, actually, chemical dependency is a successful technique for preventing suicide: "this is a holding pattern to stop me from doing something more dramatic." Unless people have access to an ideology, a structure, and support that will help them through that, it’s very difficult to overcome. I was fortunate, in that I was granted that—and then granted this system. As I’ve been working it, I’ve come to the conclusion that it is possibly universal, because I think it is derived from universal ideas. That’s why I think Jung identified something like, "if there’s a spiritual experience, and there’s a community, that’s how someone could be stopped from drinking alcohol continually." Then they took the original 12-Step Fellowship, took the Oxford Group, that had a program of sort of redemption and restitution. It seems—initially, I think, in a materialistic society—counterintuitive to think the solution to addiction is going to be spiritual awakening. But that’s what it is. The final steps are "stay connected." You’re continually inventorying, for the moment. So you’re thinking, "uh-oh—I felt something, there." You want to be in the moment, connected. I have to notice if someone makes me feel inferior, or if I’m sexually attracted to someone. Those are some of the most obvious examples of something that will take me out of my connection. The final step is to help others and remain awake.

JP: Well, that’s the end of the hero’s journey: once you go into the darkness and find something of value, the next thing to do is to bring it back and distribute it within the community.

RB: Jordan, it would be difficult for me to accept that you’ve not been sort of personally affected—angrily, rather than just objectively—because your personal trajectory—in the public eye, at least—began with the situation in Canada, with forced speech, or however it’s termed now. Are you able to distinguish between your sense of personal irritation—because I think for most people—and tell me whether or not you think this is right—academia seems like an ancillary area. It doesn’t seem mainstream, to most people. But to you, it seems very vital. But you are an academic.

JP: Well, OK. So there’s two things, there. People regard academia as ancillary, but it’s not. The reason it’s not is because the universities train the people who run things. Whatever’s mainstream in the universities right now, even though it’s separate from society, is going to be mainstream, everywhere, five years down the road. That’s a big problem.

RB: The vanguard, academia.

JP: Oh, definitely. There’s no doubt about it.

RB: Do you think what’s happening now, in terms of a media and politics, you could preemptively have diagnosed from what was happening five or 10 years ago?

JP: Oh, I think that, in some sense, I was preemptively diagnosing it. I’ve been watching the politically correct postmodern types for quite a long time. I noticed two things about five or six years ago that I really didn’t like. The first is that, because I’m a personality psychologist—as a researcher, not as a clinician—I know the literature on gender differences, in personality. It’s part of my field. I could tell that I was starting to have some reluctance to deliver the lecture on gender differences. Now, I didn’t stop, but felt that I was treading on thin ice, by delivering those lectures. I thought, "oh, that’s not good," because I’m like a comedian: I’m willing to say pretty much anything that I think is true, regardless of the consequences, in some sense, because I’d rather take the consequences of what’s true. I thought, "this isn’t good, because if someone like me—who’s rather uncontrollably mouthy, let’s say—is starting to have second thoughts about teaching what’s a very serious topic, and something about which there’s a very well-developed science, then how much are other people starting to censor?" At the same time, my students, many of whom are female, were telling me that they were really hesitant to talk about gender differences in any of the courses they were running. I thought, "oh, this is not good. This is seriously not good."

It’s certainly the case that my colleagues censor themselves increasingly on campus, with regards to the topics they’re willing to discuss. It’s subtle, because—imagine, in a given lecture, I could discuss any of 10 things, and three of them are taboo. Well, I just won’t discuss those. That’s a kind of invisible censorship. It’s not like I’ll get up, and say, "look, I could have talked to you about gender differences in personality, but I won’t, because I’m afraid." I’ll just pick another topic, because there’s lots of topics to choose from. That means there’s going to be a bunch of topics that are really important—because, actually, the issue of sex differences and personality happens to be really important—that people just won’t talk about.

The other thing that’s so annoying about this is, especially with regards to sex differences in personality—well, let’s say that you’re firmly on the side of women, just for the sake of argument. Well, do you admit to or deny the existence of sex differences in personality? What’s better for women? The radical leftists basically say, "oh, if you talk about sex differences, then you’re part of the oppressive patriarchy, and you’re attributing to women a different kind of temperament in the attempt to continue the suppression." But I could just as easily say, "wait a second—if you want to give the individual the greatest degree of freedom, you say, ‘look, you’re different from another person. You’re different on the basis of a variety of your characteristics—sex being one of them. That’s going to have some effect on what sort of choices you want to make in your life. Go ahead and make whatever choices you want, as far as they’re a direct expression of your Being.’

No serious commentator in the psychological literature, in the personality domain, debates whether or not sex differences in personality exist, or that they have a biological component. What’s also interesting about that is that none of those people are conservatives. There are no conservative psychological researchers, to speak of. They’re in a tiny minority. So the people that have done the research indicating that there are differences between the sexes and personality, and that those differences have, in part, a biological component, are liberal and left-leaning people, who’ve drawn those conclusions despite what their ideological presuppositions might have suggested to them, to begin with. I don’t know what to say about that, except that it’s all appalling.

RB: I suppose the fear must be that difference will ultimately be used for leverage, for status.

JP: Sure, and that’s a reasonable fear, because anything can be manipulated. But claims that people are identical, in some way, can also be used for the same reason. If I insist that everyone is exactly the same on all dimensions—there’s just as much of a totalitarian threat lurking in there as there is in using differences as an excuse. And we’re also not having a serious discussion about this. Yeah, men are overrepresented at the top of the economic apex. That’s true. It’s a small minority of men, by the way. It’s certainly not men in general. But they’re radically overrepresented at the bottom, and, believe me, man: nobody cares about men who are failures. They are like off the bloody radar.

RB: Yeah.

JP: There’s no sympathy for men who are failures. So men stack up at the top and the bottom. We don’t have a discussion about that, and we don’t have a discussion about the fact that women are radically underrepresented in dangerous jobs, although they are—or in trades that require brutal physical labour, or in jobs outside. So the complaint is always, "well, if you look at the top 1 per cent, there are more men than there should be, by pure sex division." It’s like, "well, yeah. But if you look at the bottom, the reverse is true." If we’re going to have the discussion—and I don’t necessarily think we should have that discussion—we should look across the entire economic spectrum.—

RB: I wonder how much of this debate is being governed by unconscious forces. I wonder how much of what we’re experiencing is a manifestation of where cartography has not yet been.

JP: I think a lot of it. Are you thinking about any particular part of it?

RB: I feel like the reason that I imagine that your arguments that are based on research are so successful is because people are expressing feelings as opposed to cogent and researched arguments. It feels like there is a powerful, dominant patriarchy, and no one can deny… I mean, there is power. There is such a thing as power, and there are people who benefit from structures being as they are.

JP: Of course.

RB: That’s the point of those structures, being the way they are. One of the things I’ve observed is that, whenever change is discussed, my tendency has always been to be sympathetic towards movements that are about change or empowerment of what might be termed "disadvantaged groups." When you’re curious about the resistance of change or the difficulties that you face when trying to bring about change, look at who would be negatively impacted, were that change to be brought about. Usually, that means that there’s some people—conservatism makes sense for a particular group of people. One thing I felt when reading your book was that—because I think you’re coming from a perspective of psychoanalysis—the language rings true, and the analysis rings true. But one of the questions I was keen to bring to you was, when you talk about skateboarders—I think it’s in the last-but-one chapter—and that spirit of young people…

JP: Courage.

RB: Yeah, courage—and willingness to try dangerous things and push forward. I wonder how that sits with the idea of an earlier passage in the book, where you talk about the gratitude that we should feel for having time to read a book, and the ability to read a book, and sort of respect for the establishment and systems that have been set up, from which we all benefit. I could find it difficult to dispute your opinion about social justice warriors, and that kind of somewhat rootless, unresearched rage. I identify what you’re saying, there: people that can’t keep their bedrooms tidy—be careful before you let them organize an economic system. But similarly, where is change going to come from? Who is going to challenge tyranny?

JP: Well, those are the sorts of twin forces that we have to contend with, across the political spectrum. I could run through something quickly—to put the things that you just brought up in perspective, let’s say. If you’re going to value some things more than others, then hierarchies are inevitable. And you have to value some things more than others, or you don’t have anything.

RB: Beauty or strength, or something.

JP: Sure, whatever it happens to be. The ability to play the flute. It doesn’t matter what it is.

RB: High on my list.

JP: Obviously, if you value music, then you’re going to value some musicians more than others, because some are better. So you have to value things in order to move forward in life, and you have to value things in order to have something valuable to produce. But if you play out the value in a social landscape, you’re going to produce a hierarchy. The problem with producing a hierarchy is that a small number of people are going to be more successful than the majority, and a very large number of people aren’t going to be successful at all, at that particular thing. It’s inevitable. So you say, "well, we have to put up with that, because we need to pursue things of value."

OK, fine. That’s the right-wing perspective, that the hierarchies are justifiable and necessary. Now, the left-wing perspective is, "yeah, but wait a minute: the problem with hierarchies is that people stack up at the bottom, and that they tilt towards tyranny across time." That’s also true, and so you need that dialectic in society, between the right wing, that says, "we need the hierarchies, and they’re useful, and you should be grateful for them, and they structure you and give you form, and they provide value," and the left, that says, "yeah, but they exclude people, and people stack up at the bottom, and that’s dangerous to the hierarchy itself, and it means that people might not have opportunity," and you have to say "yes" to that.

The situation we’re in, right now, is one where the radical leftists—and this is mostly a problem that, for me, is the universities—say, "yeah, but all hierarchies are just tyrannical power." It’s like, "oh, no, they’re not. Hierarchies are based on competence, in a functioning society, and mostly our society functions. So you can’t go that far." Now, that doesn’t mean that hierarchies don’t tilt towards self-interest and tyranny across time, but that’s a bad thing. It’s even a bad thing from the conservative perspective. So there’s room for the left. There’s room for the left, because the poor will always be with us. That’s the reason that there’s room for the left. The dispossessed need a voice, not least because there are talented people among the dispossessed, and if they’re stuck at zero, everyone suffers, because we don’t have access to their talents. It’s a bad use of resources. But on the right it’s, "no—we need the damn value hierarchies, and we need to be grateful for our traditions and our structures. They stop us degenerating into chaos."

RB: Also, across our society, numerous hierarchies emerge. At some point, decisions are being made: "is being a brilliant flutist, or being brilliant at tennis, or being brilliant at owning land, or at controlling energy resources, or dominating financial systems—which are the hierarchies that are most important?" Also, the way that resources are designated, and challenging those hierarchies, seems to become, well, almost impossible. When I was leaving the hospital that had been taking care of my mother—at the level of crisis and trauma and tragedy there, they’re excellent. They’ve got the best doctors. The guy that operated on her, Martin Griffiths, is a fantastic surgeon—it was in fact him that Trump quoted when he talked about European hospitals with blood-spatted floors from knife crime. It was a mangling of a quote that Martin Griffiths had given. And then I step outside; I’m driving a long way—Chapel Road—and there are electronic advertising boards that require energy to tell me to eat McDonalds or Kit Kats or whatever.

There’s so much poverty on that street. There always has been, in that part of East London. Terrible poverty. There are moments where I helicopter out to the macro—a perspective that no individual can long hold, a weight that can’t be long borne. But in that moment, I think, "why is this hospital struggling for resources, when we can afford to run electronic adverts for McDonalds? Who gets to decide how collectively and individually we determine where resources and where power—both in terms of energy and in terms of human power—end up? How are these decisions made?" As you say, among the dispossessed, there are great resources, great talent. One would imagine—if the research were possible—to the exact same degree as there is power and talent among the possessed, because it’s normally an accident of birth that decrees. Reading about your early life in Canada, in a blue collar community, and the sort of mental health issues, and the anger and agitation that grows there—so much of that is about resources: the dispossession of the native people of that area, the mental health issues of your friend, Chris. For me, we that are rising through these hierarchies, we that have experiences on both sides of that line, well, we are now challenging this evolutionary force. We are now in a position to talk about these hierarchies, how they’re ordered and how they’re organized, and whether there is room for negotiation.

JP: Well, it’s up to us to do that.

RB: Don’t you think there’s a risk in conservatism, of saying, "well, this is how the cards have fallen?"

JP: Of course. That is the risk in conservatism.

RB: How do we confront that?

JP: Well, the risk is that the hierarchies ossify and turn to stone, and then there’s no mobility. The idea that things can turn to stone, and they become tyrannical, is an extraordinarily old idea. For example, in the story of Exodus—the story of Moses—the Egyptians are portrayed in that story as tyrannical conservatives, essentially. They’re masters of stone, and Moses is a master of water, and water is the thing that dissolves. That drama’s being played out in these stories that are thousands of years old. In the ancient Egyptian story of Osiris and Horus, Osiris is the old king who becomes too rigid. What happens to him is that he’s dismembered by evil. That’s the consequence. So even the Egyptians, long ago, knew that the danger of hierarchies is that they become static, corrupt, and tyrannical.

Part of what we do in our ongoing political dialog—when it’s genuine dialog—is to say, "look, we need these systems; they’re not avoidable; but are they functioning properly? Are they loose enough, so that people can move? Are they serving the broader good, or have they degenerated into something that’s too tyrannical?" You kind of pointed to both of those, in the way you formulated that question. You said, "look, my mom was in the hospital, and she needed care. I found a surgeon who was an excellent surgeon." So what you did there, basically, was take a bow to the functional hierarchy of the hospital, and said, "look, the greatest surgeon actually rose to the top, and thank God for that, because otherwise my mother would be dead."

That’s a competency hierarchy, and it could be contaminated by tyranny, in which case it would be the brother of some powerful person who ended up with the surgical position, right? And then everyone dies. That does happen in many, many cultures, where nepotism or connections define your position on every axis. But then you said, "well, then I went out of the hospital, and I was driving down the road, and I saw what appeared to be a misallocation of resources." What we have to do about that is have a discussion about it, constantly. It’s like, "are we allocating resources to the appropriate place?" The other lurking problem there is, "to what degree to decide about the allocation of resources by voluntary effort—by planning—and to what degree do we let the market take care of it?" That’s also something that continually requires negotiation.

RB: Yeah, that market, mate—we can’t trust that.

JP: Well, that’s the question.

RB: We talk about it like it’s a neutral thing, but it’s just a conglomeration of interests of the powerful.

JP: Well, it’s a bunch of things. It can be that, but it can also be the way that we collectively value things.

RB: Yeah, but look at our collective values—and I’ll just quickly say this, first. I heard that, in Sweden, they regulate and control access to alcohol at a state level. Liquor stores are sort of socially run. They’re not allowed to be advertised, in Sweden. Sweden, I guess, is one of those havens of—I don’t know what your views are of Sweden, but I see a lot of stories that make Sweden seem like a postmodern democracy, almost, in some respects. Anyhow, I thought it was curious that they control alcohol in that manner. I envisaged the breweries and liquor distributors saying, "hey, that’s not a free market! You’re controlling access to alcohol!" as if, somehow, the free market was neutral. But there is no neutral: if the market is what has the power, peoples’ desires will be overly stimulated. If people have McDonalds advertised at them, or alcohol advertised at them, people will bloody eat McDonalds and drink alcohol. There has to be some moralizing force. There has to be something that’s not economically led, that’s not the manifestation of greed, that’s in the conversation. Someone in a secular society, where there is no reasonable or trusted voice of God, has to be able to say, "don’t drink too much alcohol or eat too much McDonalds," because they will.

JP: See, I think the most effective solution to that problem is to have the economic system run, let’s say, by distributed individuals, who are themselves aiming at a higher good. So I think the most effective way of regulating the market, so to speak, is to improve the moral character of the people who make up the market, rather than directly regulating the market—not that the market doesn’t necessarily need some regulation, because you might say, "how about we don’t devote alcohol advertising to children under 10?" Most people would agree that’s a reasonable perspective. So that is limitation on market forces. There are places where you can find that limitation being accepted by almost anyone. But part of what you’re pointing to is that, if the only thing that’s governing the market is concern for pure market success, then the market can produce all sorts of excesses. But I think what you want is to help orient people towards a transcendent good that’s over and above market interest.

You might say, "well, what interests should you serve, as you’re trying to make a living as a comedian?" You might want to make sure that you’re conducting yourself appropriately in the market place. You’re concerned about yourself, but also your future self—and that’s partly why addiction is such a catastrophe, because it’s great in the short term; it’s not so good in the medium-to-long run. So you have to take care of yourself and your iterations through the future. You have to take care of yourself in a way that you’re taking care of your family. You have to take care of yourself and your family in a way that you’re benefiting the community, and that should be foremost in your mind. So then, when you start to make economic decisions, even in your business, you’re not saying, "I’m going to do whatever I can to make as much money as I can." You’re going to say, "I’m going to do whatever I can to make as much money as I can, while also making sure that I’m taking care of myself and my future self and my family and my community, and being grateful for all of that, and serving it properly." And then I think the market can work more effectively, but still might require some discussion around the edges, because nothing is simple. The reason that I’m concentrating on the individual and individual development is because I think that’s the best way to do that regulation.

RB: I think that’s important. I think it’s nonnegotiable. I think it’s necessary. But I also believe that, if you have a society that’s predicated on some of the worst aspects of human behaviour—lust, desire, fear. If lust, fear, and desire are so high in the mix, if you’re constantly being prompted towards onanism and consuming, I think that individual improvement will be insufficient. I feel that your success—I don’t know what it’s based on, but I feel, to a degree, that you’ve contacted people: "oh, yeah—I can improve my own life; I can have a bit of personal authority and autonomy." I think that’s hugely positive. But if every time you step out of your house, if every time you interface with society or pick up your phone or look at a screen, the aspect of yourself that’s being nurtured, that’s being invited to participate, are the lower aspects of your nature—because those are the most successful routes to a person’s decision making impulses.

Now, I think it is difficult for these individual projects to succeed. I think that, for certain people, that message will take hold, but for others it won’t. I’m not a big fan of regulation. I understand your irritation at this postmodern deconstructionalist argument of "let’s destroy God; let’s destroy all categories: man, woman—none of it’s real." I believe in essence, the humours, the deities, the gods. I feel these things are present. But I feel that we’re already being subject to a kind of invisible tyranny. It’s already happening, and I don’t think it’s happening as a result of like some critical theory, post-Marxist—that’s not where power is. That feels like it’s sort of bullshit, but it doesn’t feel like it’s as fucking powerful as Glaxo Kline or Halliburton. What I’m interested in is power, real power, and how power is functioning, and how power is negatively impacting ordinary people.

JP: I think it’s perfectly reasonable to point out that there might be multiple ways that people experience tyrannical oppression. Every hierarchy’s going to tilt towards tyrannical form in its own particular way. I’ve been concerned about what’s happening in the university, on the radical left. Your concern—the concern you just brought up—is something like overwhelming, large-scale corporate dominance. I think that’s also a reasonable set of concerns. It might not be for the best, for example, that all of our communication is filtered through Google. That might be a bit too much. The question is always, "what can we do about it?" There’s an answer to that, actually: "we can leave people’s ability to communicate untrammelled"—so that’s why I’m an advocate of free speech—"so that we can have intelligent discussions about those problems as they emerge, and hopefully work towards solutions." We can’t just generate a structure of rules that says, "here’s the 10 rules that are going to deal with that complex situation." Things change too rapidly for that. The reason that freedom of speech—as far as I’m concerned—is the paramount right, and also the paramount moral obligation, is because it’s through our ability to exchange honest opinions that we participate in the process that enables us to keep tyranny of the sort that you described and the sort that I described at bay.

Part of the reason I’ve taken the tack that I have politically is because, well, my government had the gall to implement compelled speech legislation, without noticing what it was that they were interfering with. How do you keep tyranny at bay? The proper exchange of ideas between free individuals keeps tyranny at bay. That’s the best we’ve got. It doesn’t work perfectly, and it’s also, I think, a gift that England, in large part, has given to the rest of the world—to formalize and codify that; put it into a body of law; erect governmental structures that are really predicated on that idea. It’s a remarkable achievement, and it’s something that we should be profoundly grateful for.

RB: Thank you. I want to talk to you about—I was taking that praise on behalf of England, there. As an English person, I accept that. There are two dragons, then—at least until we reach some non-dualistic utopia, where everything is one. There is the inner dragon of our own desires and fears, but I suppose, when we’re talking about management of resources, where does the attention need to go? It’s difficult. There’s something about my background that has led me to identify as the dragon: "oh, it’s consumerism. It’s turning people into consumers," because, obviously, as an addict, that’s what I am: a consumer—an ultra-consumer. And it seems with you, with your background in academia, this neo-Marxist—but when I sort of think about socialism, e.g. "people are working too hard; you should only work four hours a day; there should be time for fishing in the afternoon"—which is in Das Kapital. I think he talks about fishing in the afternoon.

For me, that seems like a very beautiful, fair, and just idea. Also, whilst I can imagine they are irritating on a campus—particularly for somebody who’s researched such a lot—I don’t see them as powerful. That’s part of my intrigue. I suppose it’s comparable to when I was talking to Sam Harris: another person who I admire, but who I’ve got a "yeah, but I don’t know…" Like when I’m talking to Sam Harris about Islam, I go, "but how is Islam going to…" I feel like, even if we’re talking about Saudi Arabia and wahhabism—Saudi Arabia is an economic entity. They’re not an Islamic entity, in terms of, "let’s go do some Islam!" It’s, "let’s go do some business!"

JP: I’m concerned mostly with the emphasis on the collective identity, rather than the individual identity. The process that you just described, I would say—and this is the answer to the question that you posed at the beginning of our conservation: "is there something universal about the process that you laid out?" I think there is, and I think it’s at the core of individual development, and I think it’s the most powerful of forces. And so I think that the individual should be regarded as the proper locus of evaluation. The problem I have with the postmodern neo-Marxist types—apart from the fact that their analysis tends to lead to a kind of nihilism—is that, because they’re making the group the paramount level of analysis, this sort of thing gets ignored. What I’m trying to do in my work—we have a program called the Self Authoring Program, that kind of steps people through these 12 Steps that you’ve just described. The first thing that people do is write about their past—all the emotional experiences. The second thing they do is take an inventory of their personality faults and virtues, so they can rectify the faults and capitalize on the virtues. The third thing they do is chart a course for the future. It takes them into account, and others.

I see it as a reflection of this universal process that you just described. I think it’s the most powerful form of transformation. But more importantly, I think it’s the one that risks doing the least harm. It hasn’t hurt anybody, that you’ve put yourself together. It’s just good, right? It’s good for you; it’s good for the people that know you; and it’s the right level of humility. You took what you knew to be wrong in your experience; you took personal responsibility for it; you made changes for yourself; you didn’t go around pointing the finger at what was wrong with the external world and trying to fix it. It could easily be that, once you have your act together—or maybe even before—you should be doing some things to adjust political or sociological systems. But the problem with that is, "what makes you think you can trust yourself?" It’s like, "well, I’m compassionate." "Maybe—maybe you’re also envious of the successful." The probability of that’s pretty damn high, by the way. So you better know, before you express that compassion—especially in the political domain—whether that is contaminated by things about yourself that you haven’t contended with.

RB: Do you think an honest declaration along those lines—or specifically that—in the political field would be refreshing?

JP: This is a very funny thing. The emperor of ancient Mesopotamia—so this is some of the earliest political documentation we have, by the way. Here’s what they used to do to the emperor: Every New Year’s Day, they would take him outside the wall of the city—so he was responsible for everything within the walls. Outside was chaos and the unknown. They’d take him outside the city; they’d strip him of all his emperor garb, so he’s no longer emperor; they’d make him kneel. If I remember correctly, the priest would hit him with a glove, and say, "name all the ways that you didn’t embody Marduk in the last year." Marduk was the God of the Mesopotamians and the thing that took on the great dragon of chaos. And so it was the responsibility of the emperor to kneel down, and say, "here’s all the ways that I haven’t been acting out my proper self, and that brought the kingdom into disarray." And then he would be forgiven, and they would act out the reconstruction of the cosmos. That was the New Year’s celebration. And then he’d go in and try to be a good king.

RB: I like that.

JP: Yeah! No kidding. Absolutely. It’s like the confession of the emperor: "here’s the way I haven’t been good."

RB: Are there any comparable—are the powerful held up for that kind of evaluation in any form now?

JP: We don’t have rituals for that.

RB: Because we don’t acknowledge the emergence of order from chaos. We don’t acknowledge divine principles. And I think this is possibly because of an assumed meritocracy. People that are in positions of power are there for a reason. You don’t need to start stripping them naked, taking them outside the city, and saying, "how often did you wank in the Oval Office? every day? Get out."

JP: I think there might be something to that; and that’s the danger of pride that goes along with ascension and hierarchy: "well, because I’m here in this position, I must deserve it." It’s like, "yeah, but there should still be something that you’re bowing down to, and that might be the abstract idea of sovereign authority itself." If you think about it only psychologically, that’s a figure that, essentially, has a touch of divinity about it.

RB: The monarchy right now, that’s the Queen: the anointed and appointed monarch. I suppose, in a postsecular nation, she becomes the emblem of Britain, rather than the emblem of God on earth.

JP: Right. Well, I think it actually functions, to some degree.

RB: In the same way.

JP: Well, I do think so. I think your Queen in particular—our Queen, as well.

RB: Maybe, maybe,

JP: I think Elizabeth has been an embodiment of moral virtue. I mean, she’s done a remarkable job over the last—what is it, seventy-five years now. She’s held herself to an incredibly high moral standard, and I think she does sit, in the background, as emblematic of what sovereign authority might look like.

RB: This is an area where… I mean, I’m English. I can’t get away from the love of the Queen. But I would also say that she is an emblem of authority, and of power, and of wealth, and land ownership, and that there is an order that ought be respected and can’t be challenged. Every so often, this country sort of toys with the idea of republicanism. They’re always grateful when there’s a wedding—like there is this week. No one has to think, "is this right, that we’re paying for this bizarre spectacle?"

JP: Yeah, well, it is useful to think about it in a symbolic sense. One of the things that constantly threatens the United States—I think there should be four branches of government: legislative, judicial, executive, and symbolic. The problem in the United States is that the President keeps tilting towards king. Americans like the idea of the First Family and the First Lady. It’s like, "yeah… no." It kind of tilts towards a dynasty, and you’ve seen that happen with the Bushes and the Clintons. It’s not a good thing. It might be nice to have someone take the symbolic load off the President and just act that out. Your Queen does that very nicely, because all of the pomp and circumstance of the state, and all of the drama and ritual of the sovereign, can be played out in that sort of dramatic space, and your legislative and executive branches can go off and do the administration.

RB: It’s interesting that the dynasties exert themselves. In a sense, it’s a demonstration of your argument that there are certain hierarchical systems that find their way into fruition, regardless of regulation. But then, I suppose, there’s rational reasons they would have the resources, the experiences, the connections.

JP: Sure. It’s easier for them. But that’s the danger of a republic: the fact that—and it’s part of the potential corruption of the state—it’s easier for the children of those who have authority to have power. You don’t want people attaining the pinnacle of achievement because of power. You want them attaining the pinnacle of achievement because of competence. Those things always struggle. It takes a society that’s very awake to stop the hierarchies from degenerating into hierarchies of power.

RB: Because degeneration is the tendency.

JP: Sure. Well, It’s easy. It’s easy.

RB: Can you quote that W.B. Yeats poem… You know, that fearsome and terrifying… The falconer poem.

JP: Well, people have recognized that it’s the proclivity of hierarchies towards tyranny for, really, thousands of years—have seen that as a fundamental danger to adaptation. "We need hierarchies." Yes. "But they degenerate into tyranny, and they unfairly oppress." Yes. We have to be on guard against that. But that doesn’t mean that we call all hierarchies "tyrannies," because that’s not helpful—or we call all productive activity "service to the oppressive patriarchy," because that’s seriously not helpful. And we don’t dispense with hierarchies, because then people don’t have anything to do.

RB: Yes. So it’s the, "get the beam out of your eye." So if the individual is attuned; if the individual is a channel… I like the prayer of Saint Francis. I like it as a model. It invites us to find the reverse of each defective characteristic—that we all sin, that we might be living out—to become a channel of some inherent goodness.

JP: One of the things that’s interesting about that—two things, actually. The first is that the word "sin" means "to miss the target." It’s an archery term. So that’s a very interesting way of thinking about it, because it means that—

RB: —there is a target.

JP: There is a target. That’s the thing. But the next thing is—and this comes right out of that—it’s very useful to become aware of your faults, because as soon you posit a fault, you posit the opposite: by merely saying, "well, that’s a fault," you’re saying, implicitly, "well, there’s something that’s the opposite of that." So out of your recognition of faults, immediately some clarity of virtue develops. You might say, "well, this is a fault, and I really know it!" It’s like, "great! You’ve got some bedrock there. Whatever the opposite of that fault is—you might not know what that is, but whatever the opposite of that fault is, is a virtue." And then you might say, "well, I have 20 faults." It’s like, "great! The opposite of the personality that has all those 20 faults is the virtuous you, whatever that might happen to be." Well, great—then you’ve conjured out of the devil a redeemer.

RB: Undoubtedly, both in terms of cosmology and fleeting morality, there is chaos; there is vastness; but there are also patterns; there are patterns that emerge, and whether you call that pattern male, or love, or beauty, there are various patterns. I feel that there is something to get in alignment with. There is a tune; there is harmony; there is melody; there is grace.

JP: That’s all expressed in music, and all you’re using there are musical analogies—musical representations. That’s what music expresses: to have all of that in harmony. People love music because of that. Music is the harmonious interaction of patterns, and you just described all those positive spirits—that’s a good way of thinking about it—as patterns. Well, they are patterns. Then you might think there’s a pattern that is composed of all of those patterns. Well, that’s what you’re after: you’re after the pattern that’s composed of all of those patterns.

RB: Yes.

JP: Yes. Absolutely. And you want to put yourself in harmony with that, and that is a real thing. That’s a real thing. You can feel that. It’s what keeps you alive, essentially, when you’re trying to become conscious.

RB: Yes, yes. There is something important happening. I feel like what we were saying before about the acknowledgement of difference needn’t infer inferiority—that is something that we must invite.

JP: This is part of what the radical leftists keep saying: "we should celebrate diversity." It’s like, "yes! But what that means, first, is the admission that people actually differ. Otherwise, you don’t actually have diversity." I’m glad that there are conservatives. I’m glad that there are leftists. The conservatives run things; the leftists invent them. Good! And they’re really different, those people. If you have a group that’s all conservatives, and they’re going down the right path, they’re going to go down that path really fast. But if they’re going down the wrong path, they’re not going to be able to think laterally and figure out how to get out of it. If you have a group of left-leaning creative types, they’re going to come up with a hundred ideas, but the probability that they’ll organize in a stable hierarchy and implement those effectively is zero.

They’re going to have to call over the conservatives: "look, guys, we finally got a good idea. You can have one idea, because you’re conservatives. Run with it." And then they can all run with it. And so it’s really good that we have people who are like that, on both sides of the distribution. Otherwise, the creative types would sit around and come up with new ideas until they starve to death in squalor, and the conservatives would just ossify and run down a road that got narrower and narrower and narrower, and they’d all end up stuck between two cliffs, and that’d be the end of it for both of them.

RB: Thesis, antithesis, synthesis. We require synthesis.

JP: That’s the interplay of opposites—actual opposites.

RB: Yeah, yeah, yeah. The yin-yang. There needs to be necessary collusion between distinction. But for that to happen, there needs to be acknowledgment and recognition of difference. But trying to achieve equality with the annihilation of category is not a successful route.

JP: Yes. That’s exactly right. That is not a successful route.

RB: Thank you Doctor-Professor Jordan Peterson. We have good chats, don’t we?

JP: That was great. Yeah. That was really good. Absolutely. Thanks for inviting me back.

RB: Oh, no. Thank you. Thank you for your time.